JUDGMENT SHEET
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
BANNU BENCH.
(Judicial Department)

BA No.119-B of 2018
Amanullah _Vs the State etc
JUDGMENT

Date of hearing 04.05.2018

Petitioner(s)/Appellant(s): By Mr. Nagib

ullah Khattak, dvocate.

Respondent(s): | By Umer Daraz, Advocate.
State By Shahid Hameed Qureshi.
Addl: AG

ABDUL SHAKOOR, J.--- This petition has been

directed against the order, dated 06-04.2018, passed

by the learned Sessions Judge Karak, whereby the

bail sought by the petitioner has been refused in a case

vide F.I.R No.757 registered under sections 324/337-

A(i)/148/149 P.P.C, against him on 17-9-2016 at

Police station Latamber, district Karak.

2. Succinctly, the facts as disclosed through

the FIR are that on 17.09.2016 at 1935 hours,
complainant Mir Zalem , who was brought in a

Datsun to the KDA hospital Karak, with the help of

his co-villagers, reported the matter in injured

condition to the effect that on eventful day

accused/petitioner Amanullah and others namely

Barkatullah, Faizullah and Muhammad Saleem, his co

villagers, were playing cricket at the venue of

occurrence, while Muzaffar Khan S/O Sahib Din was

standing nearby them; that they were prevented by

him from playing cricket in the thoroughfare, being

used by women folk but Muzaffar Khan got

infuriated and also commanded others to beat him,

due to which other accused started beating, giving

fists and kicks blows; that his sister Mst. Tahira

Kalsoom, brother Wali Muhammad came there in

order to rescue him from clutches of the accused but

meanwhile, accused/ petitioner came out from his

house and started firing at him with his Kalashnikov,

A/Awan* (S.B) Justice Abdul Shakoor.
as a result of which he was hit on his arm and fore

head. Hence accused/petitioner alongwith others was

booked in case FIR (ibid) for attempting at his life

effectively and also for causing injuries to his sister

Mst. Tahira Kalsoom.

3. After abscondence of long period of

about one year and six months, accused/petitioner

Amanullah was arrested, he moved bail petition

before the Court of learned Sessions Judge, Karak

which was rejected. Hence, the instant Cr.Bail

application.

4. The learned counsel for the petitioner

vehemently argued that the question of guilt or

innocence of the petitioner is yet to be determined

and mere delay in arrest, after the occurrence,

cannot be treated as an absconsion of the petitioner

a sufficient ground for refusal of bail. He further

argued that notwithstanding the allegation of

A/Awan* (S.B) Justice Abdul Shakoor.
causing fire arm injury, the tenor of the occurrence

would create doubt qua the liability of petitioner

under section 324 PPC and case would fall within

the ambit of subsection (2) of section 497 Cr.P.C

for the purpose of further inquiry into the nature of

offence.

5. Conversely, learned Add: AG for state,

assisted by learned counsel for complainant, while

opposing bail, argued that petitioner is directly

charged specifically for causing injuries to the

complainant on vital part of his body; that

circumstantial evidence as well as Medical

evidence also supports the version of FIR and the

offence falls within the prohibitory clause of

section 497 Cr.P.C, hence, accused/petitioner is not

entitled for concession of bail.

A/Awan* (S.B) Justice Abdul Shakoor.
6. I have heard arguments of learned

counsel for the parties, Addl: AG for state, and

perused the record with their valuable assistance.

7. It appears from the record available on the

file that in this case, the occurrence took place on

17-9-2016 at about 1745 hours, whereas the report

has been lodged on the same date at about 1935

hours, while distance between the crime scene and

police station has been shown as 20 to 22 kilo

meters, meaning thereby that there is no chance of

consultation and deliberation.

8. Mir Zalam is the complainant of the

case and he has attributed direct role of firing to the

accused/ petitioner Amanullah, for causing injuries

to him at his right arm and fore head, due to which

his arm became incapable to perform functioning,

while other co accused have been attributed role of

beating and giving fists and kicks to his brother

A/Awan* (S.B) Justice Abdul Shakoor.
Wali Muhammad and his sister Mst. Tahir

Kalsoom. The crime empties recovered from the

crime scene by the Investigating officer, were sent

to the FSL report, and the FSL report in this respect

available on file shows that that all crime empties

four in number were fired from one and the same

weapon, i.e Kalashnikov,

9. The contention of learned counsel for the

petitioner that the co-accused of instant case have

already been enlarged on bail, hence the present

accused/petitioner is also entitled for the same relief

under the rule of consistency, is misconceived, as

the co-accused have been attributed the role of

commanding and beating brother of accused

/petitioner and his sister while the present

accused/petitioner has specifically been charged for

causing injuries to the complainant by firing at him

with his kalashnikov, thus, the role of accused/

A/Awan* (S.B) Justice Abdul Shakoor.
petitioner is not at par with the case of co-accused,

and is not entitled for concession of bail under the

role of consistency.

10. The occurrence has taken place in the

day light and both the parties are known to each

other, therefore, question of misidentification, does

not arise at this stage. Medical report, site plan,

blood stained garments of deceased as well as

empties from the spot, further corroborates version

of prosecution. When all these material pieces of

evidence taken in juxtaposition, a prima facie case

is made out against the petitioner/accused.

11. The points urged at the Bar by learned

defence counsel, in regard to commencement of

trial and cross version, if taken into consideration

and any view is expressed thereon by this Court, it

would not only touch the merit of the case, but

would also prejudice the case of either side, which

A/Awan* (S.B) Justice Abdul Shakoor.
has time and again been discouraged and

disapproved by the superior Courts. The evidence

of prosecution cannot be tested in depth at bail

stage; only tentative assessment is to be made.

12. Plea of alleged cross version invariably,

carries phenomena of self defence in it and when from

record, it is not discernible that who has aggressed

and who has acted in self defence, the parties are

normally allowed bail. But in the instant case, on

tentative assessment of the evidence, no such

circumstance can be gathered except the FIR

No.791, wherein allegations of beating and giving

fists and kicks are made against complainant Mir

Zalim in that case, but plea of this cross version at this

stage, could not be taken into consideration, as the

plea of self defence, if so raised, is yet to be

established by the accused during trial. When

prosecution evidence prima facie connects the

A/Awan* (S.B) Justice Abdul Shakoor.
accused with commission of crime, entailing capital

punishment and he himself admits the occurrence by

taking plea of cross version, then why mere cross

F.ILR should not be considered as license for grant of

bail, particularly, in view of prevailing law and order

situation in society. Accused of every cross case

cannot claim bail as a matter of right. Rather, facts of

every cross case are to be tentatively scrutinized and

assessed and then to be decided on its own merits. In

this regard case of ‘Nisar Muhammad Wassan_ and

another Vs_the State’ (1992 SCMR 501) and Arif

Din Vs Amil Khan and another’ (2005 SCMR 1402)

may be referred.

13. Moreover, the accused/ petitioner

remained absconder for a long period, for which no

explanation much less plausible one has been

furnished by him. It is settled law that a fugitive from

law, who fails to provide reasonable explanation for

A/Awan* (S.B) Justice Abdul Shakoor.
-10-

his abscondence, loses some of his normal rights and

he may be declined bail on the ground of abscondence,

leaving apart, the merits of the case.

14. It appears from the record that challan

has already been put in Court, trial has been

commenced, but in the meanwhile, case file was

requisitioned by this Court in connection with the

instant petition. Much has been argued before me

from either side, but discussion on all these points

would amount to deeper appreciation of evidence

which has always been deprecated by the Hon’able

Superior Courts at bail stage, particularly, at a stage

when trial has been commenced or is likely to

commence in the near future, because any expression

on merits at such stage, would cause prejudice to

either party, at trial stage and this principle has been

firmly and clearly laid down by the apex Court in

Muhammad Ismail’s case (PLD 1989 585).

A/Awan* (S.B) Justice Abdul Shakoor.
-l1ll-

15. For the reasons discussed above, on

tentative assessment of the material available on

record, accused/petitioner is prima facie connected

with the crime. Hence, he is not found entitled to the

concession of bail. Resultantly, the bail petition of

accused/petitioner stands dismissed, however, learned

trial Court is directed to conclude the trial within six

months, positively if not earlier than that.

Any observations made in the order being

tentative in nature should in no way prejudice the

proceedings before the learned trial Court.

Announced.
04-05-2018

JUDGE.

A/Awan* (S.B) Justice Abdul Shakoor.
