Judgment Sheet
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
BANNU BENCH
(Judicial Department)

Cr.MB. No.17-B/2021.
Nauman Khan
Vs,
The State etc.

JUDGMENT

For Petitioner: Mr. Noor Zada Khan Ahmadzai,

Advocate.

For State: Mr. Qudratullah Khan
Gandapur, Asstt: A.G.

For Respondent: Mr. Asghar Nawaz Khan, Advocate.

Date ofhearing: 04.02.2021.

aK
SAHIBZADA ASADULLAH, J.- Charged in case FIR
No.1507 dated 19.11.2020, registered under Section 324
P.P.C, read with Section 15 of the Arms Act, registered
at police station Bannu City, the petitioner Nauman
Khan applied for post arrest bail before the Court of
learned Senior Civil Judge (Admn)/MTMC which was
declined vide order dated 04.12.2020, feeling aggrieved
the petitioner approached the Court of learned
Additional Sessions Judge-IV/Judge MCTC, Bannu,
which was declined vide order dated 16.12.2020.
Feeling aggrieved the petitioner approached this court
through the instant bail petition.
2. Brief facts of the case as divulged from the

FIR, registered on the basis of murasila, are that on
-2-

19.11.2020 at 08:05 hours, complainant Shahzeb
reported he matter to one Shah Qiaz Khan ASI in the
Civil Hospital, Bannu, to the effect that his father is
running a barber shop at Tanchi Bazaar Bannu city; that
Nauman son of Muhammad Khan (petitioner) had
parked his rickshaw in front of the shop, who was asked
by his father to remove the same, upon which accused
Nauman got annoyed, took out his pistol and fired at his
father (Fida Hussain), who received firearm injury. After
the occurrence, the accused decamped from the spot,
hence, the instant F.LR.

3. The learned counsel for petitioner
vehemently argued that there is no denial to the fact that
the complainant received firearm injuries, but this fact is
also established on record that the petitioner also
sustained injuries on his person with sharp edged
weapon in the same incident and that it is yet to be
determined by the trial Court as to who was the
aggressor and who was aggressed upon and that this
factor alone makes the case of the petitioner one of
further inquiry.

4. Contrarily, learned counsel for the
respondent submitted that presence of the petitioner in
front of the shop of the respondent duly armed with a
pistol by itself is sufficient to establish his intention and
leaves no ambiguity that it was the petitioner who

aggressed upon the respondent and that, that factor alone
-3-

is sufficient to discredit the petitioner from the requested

concession.
5. Heard. Record perused.
6. In order to understand the issue in hand in

its true spirit, it is essential to go through the site-plan
and the collected material on record. It is evident from
the record that the incident in issue occurred in front of
the shop of the respondent which lies across the road
where the petitioner being a Rickshaw driver was
waiting for passengers. It was the respondent who
wanted the petitioner to vacate the occupied place which
resulted into altercation. The record transpires that the
respondent along with his sons is running a Barber shop
and on hearing altercation between the two i.e. the
petitioner and their father Fida Hussain, they also joined
hands with their father and entered into a scuffle. The
respondent received a firearm injury on his body
whereas the petitioner too sustained incised wounds at
the hands of the respondents, who was examined by the
doctor and prepared his medico-legal report stating
therein that the wounds were caused by sharp edged
weapons. Both the sides reported the matter to the local
police in the hospital where on the strength of the repot
of respondent the F.I.R ibid was registered, whereas the
version of the petitioner was penned down in the shape
of Naqal Mad No.17 dated 19.11.2020, charging the

respondent along with his sons for commission of the
-4-

offence. The report of the petitioner could not be
incorporated into F.I.R in light of the judgment reported
as “Sughran_ Bibi Vs the State (PLD 2018 SC 595). The
record left no ambiguity that the place of incident is
located in front of the shop of the respondents across the
road and this is also established on record that the
petitioner being a Rickshaw driver was occupying the
place waiting for passengers. The moot question for this
Court is to determine as to who was the aggressor and
who was aggressed upon, which at this juncture is not
possible rather the same can better be determined after
recording pro and contra evidence. At present this Court
is to assess tentatively the available record without
touching merits of the case. There is no denial to the fact
that both the sides received injuries; and that the place of
incident, the time of incident and the persons involved in
the episode are one and the same with a dispute over
parking of a rickshaw, but with their different versions.
This fact is alone sufficient to make the case of the

petitioner as one of further inquiry. Reliance is placed

on case titled “Shoaib Mehmood Butt Vs Iftikhar-
ul-Hagq and 3 others (1996 SCMR 1845), wherein it
is held that:

16. In case of counter-versions arising
from the same incident, one given by
complainant in F.L.R. and the other given

by the opposite-party case-law is almost
-5-

settled that such cases are covered for
grant of bail on the ground of further
enquiry as contemplated under section
497(2), Cr.P.C. In such cases normally,
bail is granted on the ground of further
enquiry for the reason that the question as
to which version is correct is to be decided
by the trial Court which is supposed to
record evidence and also appraise the
same in order to come to a_ final

conclusion in this regard.

7. There is no cavil to the proposition that the
Courts of law while seized of bail matters are to
tentatively assess the material brought before it and
deeper appreciation is not warranted, but equally true
that bail applications cannot be heard and decided in a
vacuum, rather the courts seized of bail matters should
apply its judicial mind to the material available on file,

so to avoid miscarriage of justice, as is held in case

titled “Zaigham Ashraf Vs the State and others’
(2016 SCMR 18).

“9. To curtail the liberty of a person is a
serious step in law, therefore, the Judges
Shall apply judicial mind with deep
thought for reaching at a fair and proper
conclusion albeit tentatively however, this
exercise shall not to be carried out in
vacuum or in a flimsy and casual manner

as that will defeat the ends of justice

-6-

because if the accused charged, is
ultimately acquitted at the trial then no
reparation or compensation can be
awarded to him for the long
incarceration, as the provisions of
Criminal Procedure Code and the scheme
of law on the subject do not provide for
such arrangements to repair the loss,
caused to an accused person, detaining
him in Jail without just cause and
reasonable ground.”

8. While analyzing the record tentatively
this Court reaches nowhere but to hold that the
petitioner has been succeeded in making out a case
for bail as one of further inquiry, resultantly, this
petition is allowed and accused/ petitioner is
admitted to bail subject to furnishing bail bonds in the
sum of Rs:2,00,000/- (rupees two lac) with two sureties,
each in the like amount, to the satisfaction of learned
trial Court/MOD concerned, be released forthwith if not
required to be detained in connection of any other
criminal case.

9. Above are detailed reasons of my short

order of even date. 2 fe
Announced.
Dt: 04.02.2021.

*Azam/P.S* JUDGE

ih

SCANNED

1 6 FEB put
hatid Khan

(S.B)
Hon'ble Mr. Justice Sahibzada Asadullah

