JUDGMENT SHEET

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT BANNU BENCH
(Judicial Department)

BA No.198-B of 2023

Ijaz Khan
Vs
The State & another

JUDGEMENT
Date of hearing: 14.4.2023

Petitioner by:

Mr. Imran Ali Shah Mandan Advocate
State by:

Hafiz Muhammad Hanif, Addl: AG.

EREEKEKEKEKEEEREKESE

FAZAL SUBHAN, J.--- Through instant petition the petitioner
Ijaz Khan is seeking his post arrest bail in connection with
case F.ILR No.186 dated 25.3.2023 registered under section
11 (B) KP CNSA of police station Mandan, District Bannu.

2. Nauman Khan S.H.O, police station Mandan
reported on 25.3.2023 to the effect that he along with police
party was present in the area for routine patrolling when in
the meanwhile he received spy information that a person is
present on the spot having huge quantity of contraband ice.
Considering the information to be genuine, he along with
police party went towards the spot of occurrence, where a

person was found present on the spot, who on seeing the
-2-
police party started running but was apprehended and his
body search was conducted. During his body search the
complainant recovered one white colour plastic envelope
which on checking was containing ice. On weighment the
recovered ice was found 250 grams. One gram ice was
separated for F.S.L and sealed in parcel while the remaining
ice along with envelop were sealed in another parcel. The
accused was arrested in the case and murasila was sent to the
police station for registration of F.LR.

3. Arguments heard and record perused.

4. After hearing the above arguments and
considering the record tentatively, no doubt there is
allegations of recovery of 250 grams of Ice from the
possession of petitioner, however, murasila is silent about the
police officials who were accompanying the complainant at
the time of patrolling of the area and it is also not clear
whether the sample/ parcel was taken to the Malkhana of
police station by the complainant himself or it is handed over
to any other police officer/official, hence safe and secure

transit at this stage of the case is not forthcoming, unless
-3-

proved otherwise during trial. The alleged recovery has been
shown on 25.3.2023, while as per receipt rahdari No.247, the
samples were dispatched after 5 days, but after lapse of some
20 days the F.S.L report is not yet procured/ received to
support the prosecution’s version that the recovered sample
was actually ice. At this juncture, it can also not be
determined whether alleged recovered articles is
Methamphetamine of Amphetamine, and if after analysis by
the chemical analyst that the substance received to them is
amphetamine then as per its definition in section 2 (aj) of the
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Narcotics Substances Act, 2019 (Act),
amphetamine being declared as psychotropic substance,
hence would be covered under section 9 (c) of the Act, with
maximum punishment of 7 years, thereby not falling within
the prohibitory clause of section 497 cr.P.C. In the case of
“Numan Khan —Vs-the State”, Cr. Misc: (BA) No.398-
B/2021 this Court has held that:-

“Perusal of the record reveals that on
28.06.2021 ICE weighing 500 grams
were shown to have been recovered from

possession of the accused/ petitioner,
-4-

however, when the sample taken from
the recovered contraband was sent to
FSL_ for physical and chemical
examination its test reveals the sample as
“amphetamine”. Thus as per section
2(aj) the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Narcotics
Substances Act, 2019, amphetamine
being declared as psychotropic substance
and its punishment will be dealt with
under the provisions of section 9 of the
Act, 2019. As stated above, 500 grams
amphetamine were shown to have been
recovered from possession of the
accused/ petitioner, hence, his case
comes under section 9 (c) of the ibid Act
and punishment provided for the offence
is up to 07 years as such case of the
accused/ petitioner does not come within
prohibition contained under section 497
Cr.P.C. In such like cases grant of bail is
a rule and refusal is an exception. At this
stage refusal of bail application of the
petitioner may amount to his wrongful
incarceration that could not be later on

remedied, if he is acquitted.”
-5-

5. For what has been discussed above, it is held
that a case for grant of bail has been made out, resultantly,
this petition is accepted and petitioner is released on bail,
subject to furnishing bail bonds of Rs. 3,00,000/-(rupees three
lac) with two local and reliable sureties to the satisfaction of
Illaqa Judicial Magistrate/ MOD concerned.

These are the detailed reason of my short order of even
date.

Announced
14.4.2023
Ihsan.

(S.B)
Hon'ble Mr. Justice Shahid Khan.

