Judgment Sheet

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
ABBOTTABAD BENCH.

JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT

Cr.M/B.No.1013-A/2018.

JUDGMENT
Date of hearing: 07/01/2019
Petitioner (Qazi Aziz urRehman) By Qazi
Muhammad Arshad,
Advocate.

State by: —§ Sardar Muhammad Asif, Assistant
AG along with Hammad Hussain
Shah Gilani, AAG.

SYED MUHAMMAD ATTIQUE SHAH, J.-

Petitioner Qazi Aziz-ur-Rehman S/o QaziFazal-
ur-Rehmanseekshis release on bail in case FIR
No. 03/2018dated 19.12.2018 under Section
161 PC read with Section 5(2) of Prevention of
Corruption Act, Police Station ACE,
Abbottabad.

Brief facts of the case are that on

ag

19.12.2018, complainant Aurangzeb Abbasi
submitted an application to the Incharge
Anticorruption, Abbottabad alleging therein

that Engineer Qazi employed in Local
Government Department has demanded bribe
of Rs. 25000/- from him on account of
preparing a bill of the work done by the
complainant. Complainant expressed his
intention to trap the accused/ petitioner. On the
basis of said application, FIR was registered
and the complainant was produced by the
Anticorruption authorities for his statement
under Section 164 Cr.P.C. where after learned
Senior Civil Judge along with the
Anticorruption staff conducted raid but the
accused/petitioner was found absent from his
office. The complainant telephonically
contacted the accused/petitioner who asked that
on 21", he would prepare his bill. Therefore, the
matter was kept pending till 21°, on which date
again the complainant along with learned
Senior Civil Judge, Abbottabad and the
Anticorruption authorities visited the office of
accused/ petitioner. The currency notes were
earlier marked by the learned Senior Civil
Judge, which were recovered from the pocket

of the accused/ petitioner.
4. Arguments heard and record gone
through.
5. Record reveals that upon
application of the complainant, the
anticorruption authorities, without any sort of
verification or inquiry, straightaway resorted to
lodge FIR against the accused/petitioner. As per
record, the alleged offence was committed on
21.12.2018, while surprisingly the FIR was
lodged prior to the commission of alleged
offence on 19.12.2018. The complainant though
alleged that the amount was demanded by the
accused/petitioner as bribe, however, the
learned Judicial Officer during trap proceedings
neither could notice the conversation between
the complainant and the accused/petitioner nor
passing of alleged bribe amount. The sole fact
that the alleged marked currency notes were
recovered from the pocket of
accused/petitioner, would not be sufficient to
hold that he had received bribe from the

complainant.
6. Moreover, Section 161 PPC is
bail-able in nature while punishment provided
for the offence under Section 5(2) of the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 is
imprisonment up to seven years or fine or both.
Thus not only the offence does not fall within
the prohibitory clause of Section 497 Cr.P.C.
but the punishment provided for the offence in
alternate as fine, also makes the case of the
accused/petitioner fit for grant of bail.
7. In view of the above facts and
circumstances of the case, the petitions in hand
stands accepted. Resultantly, petitioner
isadmitted to bail on furnishing bail bonds in
the sum of Rs. 200,000/- (two hundred
thousand) with two sureties each in the like
amount to the satisfaction of Illaqa/Duty
Judicial Magistrate concerned. Sureties must be
local, reliable and men of means.

These are the reasons for short
order of the even date.

Announced. JUDGE
Dt.07.01.2019.
Tufail Hon'ble Justice Syed Muhammad Attique Shah.
