JUDGMENT SHEET
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, D.I.KHAN BENCH
(Judicial Departinent)

Criminal Revision No.27-D of 2022

Muhammad Younas Parvez Khan
Versus

Zahoor ud Din and others
JUDGMENT.

For petitioner: Mr. Salahuddin Khan Gandapur,
Advocate.

For respondents: Mr. Aamir Farid Saddozai, Asstt: A.G
and Muhammad Salim Marwat,
Advocate.

Date of hearing 20.02.2024

FAZAL SUBHAN, J.- instant criminal revision is filed by
the petitioner against the order dated 03.02.2016 of the
learned Additional Sessions Judge-VI, D.I.Khan, vide
which the complaint of the petitioner filed under sections
3/4 of the I!Negal Dispossession Act, 2005 (Act), was

dismissed.

2. Relevant facts of the case are that complainant
Muhammad Younis Parvez Khan claimed to be the owner
and in possession of property bearing Khasra Nos.423, 424,
544 and 6261/545 total measuring 29 kanals 04 marlas
situated in Takwara Nulla Hussainzai, Tehsil! Kulachi,
District D.I.Khan, and that Juma Khan and Zabtu Khan
were cultivating the disputed property as tenants-at-will and
after their death, the property was reverted to him and

therefore, the accused/respondents have no right in the

-2-

disputed property. That on 22.11.2015 at 10 AM, he
alongwith Haqnawaz and Fazal Rehman, residents of
Kulachi, went to the disputed property for cultivation, when
in the meanwhile the accused/respondents came duly armed
with weapons and started altercation with them and after
expelling them from the disputed property, forcibly
occupied it, hence, the petitioner being Jaw abiding and
respectable person, has approached the Court of learned

Sessions Judge with the complaint.

3. After filing the complaint, the learned trial Court,
after recording the statement of petitioner/complainant,
sought report from the SHO, police station Kulachi, who
submitted his report alongwith the report of Patwari Haiqa
and revenue record and after hearing arguments, the learned
trial Court dismissed the complaint on 03.02.2016.
Agerieved therefrom, the petitioner has filed the instant

criminal revision.

4, Arguments of learned counsel for the petitioner and
that of learned counsel for the respondents heard and record

gone through.

5. It is well settled by now that for proving the
assertions under sections 3/4 of the Ilegal Dispossession
Act, 20025, a complainant has to give full details of the
mode and manner in which he was holding possession of an

immovable property and the time, mode and manner in
<

which he has been dispossessed. The august Supreme Court
in the case of Mumtaz Hussain. Vs. Dr. Nasir Khan and
others (2010 SCMR 1254) has laid down the criteria for
establishing the commission of offence under the Act and

the relevant portion is reproduced herein below for the sake

« 9p

of convenience:-

Similarly, in another case, the Honourable Sindh High

Court in the case of Dr. Babar Yaqoob Sheikh. Vs. Haris
Hafeez and 3 others (2020 MLD 1274 Sindh) has also held

that:-

“Thus for the purpose of attracting the
provisions of section 3 of the Act, the
Court is required to examine as to
whether the property was an immovable
property; secondly that the person was
owner of the property or in the lawful
possession, Thirdly, that the accused
has entered into or upon the property
unlawfully. Fourthly, that such entry is
with intention to dispossess i.e. ouster,
evict or deriving out of possession
against the will of the person in actual
possession, or to grab i.e capture, seize
suddenly, take greedily or unfairly, or to
control ie. to exercise power or
influence over, regulate of govern or
relates to authority over what is not in
one's physical possession.”

“It is necessary at the time of dealing
with the complaint under the Ilegal
Dispossession Act, that the complainant
should specifically describe the
unlawful act of dispossession (actus
rea) by complete detail of action done
by all those, who were responsible for
his dispossession of the property
illegally and nominate them as
proposed accused in the complaint.
What is more, it is also necessary for a
complainant to establish that there
exists a clear cut criminal intention

ah

(mens rea) on the part of such proposed

accused. I am of the view that in the

absence of description of unlawful act

(actus rea) and a willful knowledge a

belief that he is doing an unlawful act

(animous nocendi) or criminal intention

(mens rea), a complaint under Illegal

Dispossession Act, 2003 even against

an encroacher cannot succeed. It is a

settled principle of criminal law that the

person, who alleges some fact, has to

prove the same without reasonable

doubt. In this regard reliance is placed

on the case of Wagar Ali and others. Vs.

State and others (PLD 2011 SC 181).”
In his complaint, the complainant has admitted that Juma
Khan and Zabtu Khan, predecessors of respondents No.1
and 2, were in possession of the property in dispute and
after their death, the disputed property has been reverted to
him. No date and time and reversion/return of possession of
the disputed property is mentioned in the complaint to prove
that he got possession after the death of Juma Khan and
Zabtu Khan and therefore, when he has not mentioned the
actual fact of receiving possession of the property, then the
question of his dispossession does not arise. The record also
suggests that Muhammad Salim son of Javed is recorded in
possession of the disputed property on the basis of Khasra
Girdawri, already annexed with the file. The learned
counsel for the respondents also produced copy of mutation
No.3008 dated 22.02.2018 through which the respondents
have purchased some shares of Mst. Iqbal Akhtar and Mst.

Naheed Anwar, daughters of Ghulam Sarwar, the real

sisters of the complaint and prima facie, by virtue of this
~5-

mutation, the respondents have become co-owners in the
disputed property, unless rebutted through cogent and
convincing evidence, and therefore, their status has been
changed during pendency of the complaint from tenants-at-

will to co-owners/co-sharers.

6. The learned counsel for the respondents, during his
arguments, also produced copy of Gazette Notification
through which amendment has been made in the Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa Tenancy Act, 2014 (Act) and submitted that
by way of insertion of section 3A, after section 3 of the said
Act, a bar on the succession of non-occupancy tenancies has
been imposed. The newly inserted section 3A(1)(2) are

reproduced hereinbelow for sake of convenience:-

“3A(1)—Notwithstanding anything
contained in this Act or in any other
law for the time being in force, on
commencement of the Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa Tenancy (Amendment)
Act, 2014, right of succession of tenancy
to the predecessor or successor in
interest of a tenant shall cease.

3A(2)—The existing tenants, enjoying
tenaney rights before the
commencement of the Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa Tenancy (Amendment)
Act, 2014, shall continue their right of
tenancy till their eviction through due
process of law.”

After going through the said provision, true, that
amendment has been brought and section 3A has been

inserted into the Act, which prohibits the succession of non-
-6-

occupancy tenancies, however, under sub-section (2) of the
added section 3A of the Act, a tenant who enjoys tenancy
right before the commencement of the Act, has been given
protection and such tenants were to continue their right of
tenancy till their eviction through a due process of law. The
complainant has not adopted the normal procedure for
eviction of the tenants. At the same time, the respondents
have improved their status from one of tenants to that of co-
owners/co-sharers through the alleged mutation No.3008
dated 22.02.2018 and therefore, they cannot be said to have
illegally occupied the disputed property and the only course
now available to the petitioner is to file a petition for
partition before the relevant forum to separate his share of

the disputed property.

7. In this view of the matter, the instant petition being

without any substance and merits is hereby dismissed.

mg eS
Announced. w
Dt:20.02.2024. JUDGE
Habib/*

(SB)
Hon ‘ble Mr. Justice Fazal Subhan

