JUDGMENT SHEET
PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, D.LKHAN BENCH
(Judicial Department)

Cr.A No.78-D/2019.

Haji Khan Zaman

Versus
Zabee Uilah etc.

JUDGMENT
For Appellant: Muhammad Waheed Anjum, Advocate.

For Respondent: Mr. Rizwan Ullah Arayn, Advocate.
For State: Mr. Aamir Farid Saddozai. Asstt: A.G.
Date of hearing: 18.7.2023.

RK
MUHAMMAD FAHEEM WALI, J.- This judgment shall also
dispose of the connected Criminal Appeal No.10-D of 2021
titled “Haji_Khan Zaman Vs. Nacem Ullah etc” as both the
matters are the outcome of one and same FIR No.262
dated 28.6.2014, under Sections 489-F, 419, 468, 506 PPC of
Police Station Cantt: D..Khan. Criminal Appeal No.78-D of
2019 has been filed against the judgment dated 27.11.2019,
rendered by learned Judge Judicial Magistrate-II, D.I.Khan,
whereby the accused/respondents have been acquitted, while the
connected criminal appeal has been filed against the judgment
dated 02.02.2021, rendered by learned Additional Sessions
Judge-I, D.I.Khan, whereby appeal against conviction, filed by
accused Nacem Ullah was accepted by the appellate Court below
and pursuant thereto, he was acquitted from the charges levelled

against him in the ibid FIR.
2. Brief facts of the case as narrated in the FIR, are
that the appellant submitted an application (Ex. PW 2/1) to the
District Police Officer, D.I.Khan for registration of criminal case
under sections 406, 489-F, 419, 420, 467, 506, 148, 149 PPC
against the respondents. The application was marked for inquiry
to Anees-ul-Hassan ASI. As per contents of the application, the
appellant had entered into a sale agreement of a market situated
at Bazar Ahmad Khan, Bannu through execution of an Jgrar
Nama dated 17.12.2013, vide which the accused/respondents
were required to pay sale consideration in accordance with the
said agreement. In view thereof, accused Naeem Ullah issued
cheque bearing No.0052409114 dated 16.12.2013, amounting to
Rs.35,00,000/- and cheque No.7251349 dated 25.12.2013,
amounting to Rs.50,00,000/-, while accused Zabeeh Ullah issued
cheque No.0052409115 dated 25.12.2013, amounting to
Rs.15,00,000/-. However, only cheque No.0052409114,
amounting to Rs.35,00,000/- could be encashed, while rest of the
two cheques were dishonoured when presented to the bank
concerned; that the accused also deposited Rs.9,80,000/- in the
account of complainant, while Rs.20,000/- were paid to him
through his brother Hafiz Ghazi Marjan. On demand of the
complainant for payment of sale consideration, the accused
threatened him of dire consequences and ultimately on 08.6.2014
at about 10:00 a.m, the accused entered into the Baithak of
complainant with Kalashnikovs and criminally intimidated him
for transfer of the market. In view of findings of the concerned

inquiry officer and as per order of the concerned Judicial
Magistrate, criminal case vide the captioned FIR was registered

against the accused/respondents.

3. On completion of the investigation, complete
challan against the accused was submitted before the trial Court,
where on conclusion of trial accused/respondents No.1 to 4 were
acquitted by the trial Court vide judgment dated 27.11.2019,
whereas co-accused Naeem Ullah was convicted under Section
489-F PPC and sentenced to undergo two years rigorous
imprisonment with fine of Rs.40,000/- or in default thereof to
further undergo one month simple imprisonment. Appeal against
conviction and criminal revision there-against were filed before
learned Sessions Judge, D.I-Khan, which were entrusted for
disposal to learned Additional Sessions Judge-I, D.I.Khan, who
accepted the appeal and thereby acquitted accused Naeem Ullah,
while criminal revision was dismissed for having become

infructuous. Hence, this and the connected criminal appeal.
4. Arguments heard and record scanned.

5. To resolve the controversy, it would not be out of

place to reproduce Section 489-F, P.P.C., which is as under:-

"489-F, P.P.C. Dishonestly issuing a
cheque.--Whoever dishonestly issues a
cheque towards re-payment of a loan or
fulfillment of an obligation which is
dishonoured on presentation, shall be
punishable with imprisonment which may
extend to three years, or with fine, or with
both, unless can establish, for which the
burden of proof shall rest on him, that he had
made arrangements with his bank to ensure
that the cheque would be honoured and that
4

the bank was at fault in not honouring the
cheque."

For proving the offence under Section 489-F of
the Pakistan Penal Code, 1860, the prosecution is duty bound to

prove its essential ingredients, which are reproduced below:-

i Issuance of cheque with dishonest
intention;

ii. The purpose of issuing the cheque should
be

(a) Re-payment of loan;

(b) To fulfill an obligation;

iii. On presentation, the cheque is
dishonoured.

6. Section 489-F has been inserted into Pakistan
Penal Code, 1860, through Criminal Law (Amendment)
Ordinance 2002. Rationale behind the said enactment does not
call for a mechanical action immediately when a cheque is
returned by a Bank as dishonoured, but is to be used only where,
prima facie, the purpose of issuing the cheque was dishonesty
pure and simple in the matter of payment of loan. Business
transaction, genuine disputes and contractual obligations would
not be sufficient to constitute an intention for such offence,
hence, section 489-F PPC, cannot be used as a tool for recovery
of amount in civil liability. The words “whoever dishonestly
issues a cheque” are of much significance which means that
offence is constituted when a cheque is dishonestly issued. The
main purpose of section 489-F, P.P.C. is only to penalize an
accused person who has knowingly issued a cheque with

dishonest intention that it would be dishonoured. As stated

earlier this statute cannot be turned into mechanism for recovery
of any amount on the basis of some business transaction. Mere
issuance of cheque and its becoming dishonoured, being
actus reas would not be able to attract the provisions of $.489-F,
P.P.C., simply for want of presence of element of dishonesty in
the matter. In absence of dishonesty in issuance of such cheque,
the prime ingredient of the offence would not stand satisfied and
there would be no offence. For deciding whether or not, there
appeared a dishonest intention in issuance of cheque, the Court
should take notice of the facts culminating in the issuance of
such cheque. Cheque which is issued as a security so as to
develop trust between the parties as a matter of normal business
dealings, and is not the outcome of any transaction of
consideration of the time thereof, would not be a subject of
criminal accountability of $.489-F, P.P.C. for want of element of
relevant mens rea. To constitute the offence, dishonesty on the

part of payer is a condition precedent.

7. As far as dishonesty is concerned, in order to make
out a case under Section 489-F PPC, the prosecution is duty
bound to prove the dishonest intention of the accused in issuing
the relevant cheque. The term “dishonestly” has itself been
defined in Section 24 of the Pakistan Penal Code, 1860, which

for ready reference, is reproduced below:-

24. “Dishonestly”. Whoever does anything
with the intention of causing wrongful gain to
one person or wrongful loss to another person
is said to do that thing “dishonestly”.
From the aforesaid definition, the term
“dishonestly” means and includes the intention to cause
wrongful gain to one person and wrongful loss to another person.
These terms of wrongful gain and wrongful loss have, in turn,
been defined in Section 23 of the P.P.C. itself, whereby
wrongful gain and a gain by unlawful means regarding a
“property” to which the person so gained is not legally entitled
and conversely, “wrongful loss” is a loss caused to a person by
unlawful means regarding property from which he is being
wrongfully deprived of. For the sake of convenience, Section 23
is reproduced below:-

“23. “Wrongful gain”.— Wrongful gain is a
gain by unlawful means of property to which
the person gaining is not legally entitled.

Gaining wrongfully. Losing wrongfully. A
person is said to gain wrongful when such
person retains wrongfully, as well as when
such person acquires wrongfully. A person is
said to loss wrongfully when such person is

wrongfully kept out of any property as well as
when such person is wrongfully deprived of

property.

8. Conjoint effect of the above provisions of law
clearly suggests that to make out a case under the term
“dishonestly”, a wrongful gain or wrongful loss in relation to a

property to a person has to be established.

9. As a corollary to the above explanation, it is
abundantly clear from the record and admitted position that in
pursuance of the agreement to sell, no wrongful gain or wrongful

loss has occasioned as the property has not changed hands
because the possession of the property still lies in the hands of
the appellant coupled with the fact that no transfer of ownership
has also been effected. In view of the above, when the property
in question is still in possession of the complainant and no
Registry or mutation has been entered or attested in that regard,
necessary ingredients as per the provisions of Sections 23 and 24
of Pakistan Penal Code, 1860, have not been fulfilled to

constitute offence under Section 489-F PPC.

10. So far as merits of the case are concerned, there is
no denial to this fact that the appellant/complainant owned a
market consisting of certain shops and he entered into an
agreement dated 17.12.2013 (Ex. PW 2/5), with the accused with
respect to the said shops. According to the complainant,
Rs.55,00,000/- per maria was sold to accused Naeem Ullah and
Zabeeh Ullah and total sale price was fixed at Rs.15,70,55,000/-.
Three cheques amounting to Rs.35,00,000/-, 50,00,000/- and
Rs.15,00,000/- were issued by the afore-named accused,
however, out of three cheques, two cheques were dishonoured
when presented to the bank concerned, while cheque amounting
to Rs.35,00,000/- was encashed. Similarly, Rs.9,80,000/- were
transferred to his account by accused Zabeeh Ullah, while
Rs.20,000/- were paid through his brother Hafiz Ghazi Marjan.
Complainant while appearing before the trial Court, during
cross-examination admitted in unequivocal term that the market
in question is still in his possession and no registry or mutation
has been entered or attested in favour of accused Naeem Ullah.

He also admitted that the cheques were not signed before him,

rather same were already filled at the time when same were
handed over to him. He also admitted that he has not filed any
suit for specific performance. He further admitted that accused
Naeem Ullah had filed a suit before Civil Court at Bannu, which
was dismissed. Needless to mention that Section 489-F of P.P.C,
is not a provision which is intended by the Legislature to be
used for recovery of an alleged amount. It is only to determine
the guilt of a criminal act and award of a sentence, fine or
both as provided under section 489-F, P.P.C. On the other
hand, for recovery of any amount, civil proceedings provide

remedies, inter alia, under Order XXXVII of C.P.C.

11. For the aforesaid reasons, this Court comes to an
irresistible conclusion that the prosecution has miserably failed
to prove the essential ingredients of the offence under section
489-F PPC. No mis-appreciation or non-appreciation of the
material evidence has been noticed by this Court in the
impugned judgments so as to warrant interference. Accordingly,

this and the connected appeal having no merit and substance are

hereby dismissed.

Announced:

Dt: 18.7.2023. pbve0

Kifayat/CS* —_—* .
JUDGE

(S.B)

Hon'ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Faheem Wali

