Nawab

JUDGMENT SHEET

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
MINGORA BENCH (DAR-UL-QAZA), SWAT
(Judicial Department)

Cr.M B.A. No. 160-M/2017.
JUDGMENT
Date of hearing: 03.5.2017.

Petitioners:- (Mst. Rehana & Dawood) by M/S

Muhammad _Raziq_ and Aziz Muhammad,
Advocates.

Respondents:- (the State & I another) by

Barrister Asad Hameed-ur-Rahman State
counsel and Mr. Fazal Ahmad, Advocate.

MOHAMMAD IBRAHIM KHAN, J.- Mst. Rehana
and Dawood Petitioners herein, being
implicated in case FIR No. 73 dated 03.03.2017
charged under sections 496-A, 109 PPC
registered at Police Station Dargai District
Malakand are jointly looking for their post

arrest bail.

2. Prior to, an application bearing No.
132/4 of the year 2017 was preferred before the
Court of learned Sessions Judge/Zila Qazi
Malakand Camp Court Dargai, which was

dismissed by an order dated 12.04.2017.
Nawab

3. Gul Badshah who has come up as
complainant reported that his daughter Mst.
Rehana was engaged one year prior to making
of this report. The 'Nikah' was performed with
Fawad son of Qabil Muhammad. His daughter
Mst. Rehana is a student of Bachelor of Arts.
She is a sports girl who has achieved many
medals for her outstanding performance in
various competitions. In order to participate in
games she often used to visit different cities and
then to return after 8/9 days. On this day falling
on 01.02.2017 Mst. Rehana on the pretext to
participate in games to be held in Lahore left
her house when by now 12 days have been
passed, but she has not yet returned. On
collection of the information, it has now been
disclosed that this time she had not gone to
Lahore and on further information it is as learnt
that she was enticed by Dawood son of Habib-
ur-Rahman resident of Jaban Dargai for the
purpose of marriage. Behind this act of
contracting marriage Fida Muhammad son of

Abdaal Nana resident of Sakhakot abetted
Nawab

performance of Nikah being taken her by a
Datson bearing No. AFR 017. While she left the
house had taken away valuables golden
ornaments 10 tolas and Rs. 300,000/- in cash.
While making the report previous Nikah-
Nama/Mehr-Nama of Mst. Rehana his daughter

were produced as token of evidence.

4. Having heard arguments of learned
counsel for the Petitioners, learned counsel for
the complainant and learned State counsel,

record with their assistance gone through.

5. Learned counsel for the Petitioners

referred to 2011 MLD 1048 (Peshawar) "
Abdul_Ghafoor_vs_the State_and_another",

2011 MLD 1020 (Lahore) " Mukhtiar Ahmad
ys_the State_and_others", 2013 YLR_ 990
(@eshawar) " Said Nawab and 2 others vs the
State_through Additional Advocate General
and_ another", 2010 YLR 312 (Peshawar) "
Imran_Bhatti_and_another_vs_Province_of

Sindh", 2010 P Cr. LJ 961 (Lahore) " Amir vs

the State and another", 2013 YLR_ 2220
Nawab

(Lahore) " Muhammad Zeeshan Zarif vs the

State and another" and PLD 2013 Lahore 538

Ld

' Igra Javed alias Saba _ ys Station House

Officer and other". \n the light of these dictums
of the Hon'ble superior Courts prayed for the
grant of bail in favour of the Petitioners. On
other hand, learned counsel for the complainant
assisted by learned State counsel though did not
place reliance on any precedents of the Hon'ble
superior Courts, however vehemently opposed
the submissions put-forward by learned counsel
for the Petitioners and prayed for utter dismissal

of the bail petition being bereft of merits.

6. This case is registered at the
instance of learned Justice of Peace Dargai by
way of acceptance of an application under
section 22-A Cr.P.C. As far as applying of
section 496-A PPC with regard to the role of
Mst. Rehana is taken for, learned State counsel
frankly admitted that the contents of Section
496-A PPC being defined under the mentioned
section of law would not be attracted as to keep

her behind the bars.
Nawab

7. In the case of Petitioner Dawood
who is said to have contracted marriage with
Mst. Rehana for consideration of Mehr of
Rs. 5,000/-, which was paid there and then at
the time of solemnizing of the Nikah. To this
effect there are dower entries in the Nikah-

Nama at Serial No. 13 & 14.

8. The Petitioner Mst. Rehana
credentials are available on the file, she being
sports girl has participated in sports fixtures at
Government Girls Secondary School. She being
a successful Taekwondo player, who has given
Taekwondo training and Referee Courses. She
has participated in 11th Korean Ambassador
Junior National Taekwondo Championship
2016. She being a complainant of complaint
under section 200 of the Criminal Procedure
Code read with sections 452,506 PPC pertaining
to City B Division Sheikhupura against her
parents including Fawad, who at the time was in
contact being betrayed to him. She has recorded
her statement on 09.02.2017 before the learned

Judicial Magistrate Sheikhupura. This statement
Nawab

would reveal she has contracted marriage on
06.02.2017 with Dawood Khan on her own free
will and consent and nobody forced her. She has
further stated that she has never been abducted
and she on her own free will left the house of
her parents with adding information that she has
not taken any valuables alongwith her while

leaving the house of her parents.

9. Had there are reason to believe that
Mst. Rehana being abducted or enticed by co-
accused/Petitioner Dawood she would never
lodge this complaint against her own parents.
This minimize the possibility of registration of
case under section 496-A PPC against the
accused/Petitioners. There are reasons to believe
that this is a case of further inquiry into the guilt
of the accused/Petitioners, who have now
entered into Nikah and both of them verify the
same. However it is open for the prosecution to
prove earlier Nikah in between Mst. Rehana and

Fawad Khan.
Nawab

10. In view of the above observations,
both the Petitioners are entitled to the
concession of bail subject to their furnishing
bail bonds in the sum of Rs. 200,000/- (Rupees
two lacs) with two sureties each in the like
amount to the satisfaction of learned Trial
Court, who shall ensure that the sureties are

local, reliable and men of means.

11. These are the reasons of my short

order of even date.

Announced

Dt: 03.05.2017. JUDGE
