C¢

PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, BANNU BENCH.
(Judicial Department)

BA No.456 -B of 2023
Irfan
Vs.
Adnan Khan and another.

JUDGMENT

For petitioner: Mr. Muhammad Shoaib Khan
Saduzai advocate.

For State: Mr, Hafiz Muhammad Hanif Addl: A.G
For respondent: Mr. Abdul Nasir Khan Wazir advocate.

Date of hearing 09.10.2023

2k ie a oe oe a

FAZAL SUBHAN, J.--- The petitioner Irfan, seeks his
release on bail, in case F.I.R No. 301, dated 10.06.2023,
registered under section 302/34 P.P.C, Police Station Basia
Khel, District, Bannu.

2. It was on 10.06.2023, at 10:30 hours, that the
complainant Adnan Khan along with dead-body of his brother
Waseem Khan and friend Zafran, at D.H.Q, hospital, reported
the matter that his brother Waseem Khan was on pillion,
while his friend Zafranullah was driving the motorcycle, and
he was riding on his own motorcycle, on their way to Nezam
Bazar. Zafranullah and his brother were ahead at some
distance, when they reached Branch road, Ismail Khoni Khel,
accused Irfan, Hizbullah sons of Samiullah, duly armed with

Kalashnikovs, were already present. Both on seeing brother of
C€

-2-

complainant started firing at them, with the intention to cause
their death, as a result thereof, his brother and Zafranullah
were hit and fell down, while he due to fear stopped the
motorcycle at some distance. Accused after commission of
offence decamped from the spot. When he attended, both of
them were already dead. Motive for the offence alleged to be
altercation between his brother and accused some two days
earlier.

3. The learned counsel for the parties alongwith
Addl: Advocate General were heard and the record was gone
through.

4. The record reveals that the occurrence took place
at 19:25 hours, whereas the matter was reported at the D.H.Q,
hospital at 21:30 hours, with the delay of 2 hour and 5
minutes, which has not been explained. As per site plan at the
relevant time of occurrence deceased were travelling towards
north side, while the complainant following them on his
motorcycle, the petitioner was given point No.4 in the site-
plan, which means the petitioner was on left side of the
deceased, when allegedly they were fired, while as per post
mortem report the deceased received injuries mainly on right
side of their bodies, thus for the time being there is conflict
between the ocular and medical evidence. The Investigating
Officer during inspection of the spot recovered 22 crime

empties, which were sent to the F.S.L and report thereof
Neg)

-3-

reveals that all the empties were fired from one and same 7.62
mm bore weapon, and thus it is yet to be determined that as to
whether both the accused have participated in the commission
of offence or it is the job of one and the same person. Hence,
the material available on record makes the case of petitioner

one of further inquiry into his guilt. In case titled “Nazar Gul

Vs the State and another reported in (2016 PCr. LJ 297), it
was held that:

“Though similar role of
indiscriminating fring has been
attributed to the accused-petitioner as
well as the absconding co-accused, but
from the spot only five empties of .30-
bore along with a spent bullet have been
retrieved. As per the FSL report, all the
five empties have been fired from one
and the same .30-bore weapon which
certainly raises a question as to whether
the unfortunate act is the doing of one
person or more. This factor alone takes
the matter to one of further probe and
in the process entitling the accused-
petitioner to the concession of bail.”

5. Though the complainant Adnan has alleged to
have seen the occurrence, reporting that he was following the
deceased on his motorcycle, but firstly, the matter was
reported after delay of 2 hours and secondly the motorcycle
whereupon he was following the deceased has not been

produced to the Investigating Officer, hence, it is yet to be
CC

-4-

determined during trial as to whether the complainant was
actually present at the spot at the time of occurrence requires
further inquiry. It is now well settled that bail application
cannot be decided in isolation. For deciding bail application,
assessment of available record has to be made to assertion
whether the allegation in the F.I.R and material collected
during investigation do connect the accused of the case with
the crime, because liberty of a person(s) cannot be curtailed
due to bald assertion and if no connecting material is brought
on record then benefit of doubt can be extended in favour of

accused. Guidance in this respect can be derived from the case

titled “Fahad Hussain and another Vs_State through

Prosecutor General Sindh” (2023 SCMR 3645), wherein it is
held that.

“It is well settled principle of the
administration of justice in criminal law
that every accused is innocent until his
guilt is proved and this benefit of doubt
can be extended to the accused even at
bail stage, if the facts of the case so

warrant.”

6. Thus, while applying the same parameters, the
petitioner has been succeeded in making out a case. Resultantly,
this petition is allowed and the accused/petitioners are directed to
be released on bail subject to furnishing bail bonds in the sum of

Rs:1,00,000/- (one lac) each with two sureties, each in the like
-5-
amount, to the satisfaction of learned [Illaqa Judicial
Magistrate/MOD concerned.

7. Needless to mention that the observations so
rendered are tentative in nature and shal! not influence the mind of
the trial Court. Above are the detailed reasons of my short order of

the even date.

Announced:
Dt: 09.10.2023 : es > 25
*Azam/P.S*

JUDGE
(S.B)

Hon'ble Mr. Justice Fazal Subhan.

2 § OCT 2023
