IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
PESHAWAR
(Judicial Department)

Cr.Misc.QP NO.211-P/2014

Date of hearing:

Petitioner (s) :

Respondent (s) :

JUDGMENT

ASSADULLAH KHAN CHAMMKANTI, J.- Through

the instant petition under section 561-A Cr.P.C., petitioner
Mst. Bibi Roza, seeks quashment of order dated
24.09.2014, passed by learned Judicial Magistrate/ SCJ,
Swabi and order dated 11.10.2014, rendered by learned
Revisional Court/ Additional Judge-III Swabi, whereby her
application for redemption of house measuring 04 marals,
situated inside Abadi Mohallah Khadar Khel Moza Punj
Pir, attached in favour of the Provincial Government vide
order dated 04.09.2014 in consequence of proceedings
under section 88 Cr.P.C., has been turned down by both the
courts below.

2. Facts in brief forming the background of the
instant petition are that in consequence of case FIR
No.1097 dated 04.10.2013 under sections 302/34 PPC in

Police Station Swabi, Wilayat Shah (husband of the

petitioner) absconded, therefore, proceedings under
sections 204 and 87 were initiated against and ultimately,
under section 88 Cr.P.C., the house in question being
allegedly owned said Wilayat Shah was attached to the
Provincial Government vide order dated 04.09.2014, for
redemption of which the petitioner applied before the two
courts below but her request was turned down, hence, this
petition.

3. Learned counsel for the petitioner argued that
the house in question is the sole ownership of the petitioner
and in her occupation being transferred to her by her
husband Wilayat Shah in the year 2007, much prior to
registration of the case against him in the year 2010,
therefore, the same has wrongly been attached in favour of
the Provincial Government; that both the courts below
without affording an opportunity to the petitioner to
substantiate her claim in light of mandate of S.88 (6-A)
Cr.P.C., haphazardly dismissed her application, therefore,
the impugned orders being against the law and facts are
liable to be quashed.

4. Conversely, learned AAG assisted by learned
counsel for respondent contended that as per revenue
record, the house in question was the ownership of

absconder Wilayat Shah; that its alleged transfer through

an unregistered Tamleek nama in the name of his wife/
petitioner is after thought; that the revenue record having
more weight than unregistered deed, the learned Judicial
Magistrate by adopting the proper procedure under section
88 Cr.P.C. has rightly attached the same to the Provincial
Government. They while supporting the impugned orders,
sought dismissal of the petition.
5. I have heard the arguments advanced at the
bar and perused the record carefully.
6. The ground which prevailed before the two
courts below while dismissing the application of the
petitioner is that as per revenue record that house in
question was the ownership of Wilayat Shah absconder,
therefore, the same has rightly been attached and that the
claim of the petitioner being based on an unregistered
deed, is not of much weight as compared to the revenue
record. Sub-section (6-A) (6B) and (6C) of S.88 Cr.P.C.,
provides proper mechanism for the person having interest
in the property attached under section 88 Cr.P.C. as well as
the Court to be adopted in such situation. For convenience
these are reproduced below:-

“6-A if any claim is preferred to, or

objection made to the attachment of, any

property attached under this section within

six months from the date of such
attachment, by any person other than the
proclaimed person, on the ground that the
claimant or objector has an interest in such
property, and that such interest is not liable
to attachment under this section, the claim
or objection shall be inquired into, and may
be allowed or disallowed in whole or in
part:

Provided that any claim preferred or
objection made within the period allowed
by this sub-section may, in the evet of death
of the claimant or objector, be continued by
his legal representative.

(6B) Claims or objections under sub-
section (6-A) may be preferred or made in
the court by which the order of attachment
is issued or, if the claim or objection is in
respect of property accused under an order
endorsed by (sessions Judge) in accordance
with the provisions of sub-section (2) in the
court of such Magistrate.

8. Perusal of sub-section (6A) of S.88 Cr.P.C.,

reveals that any person having interest in the attached

property can prefer claim or objection within a period of
six months from the date of attachment. In the instant case
the house in question has been attached on 04.09.2014
while the objection/ claim has been preferred by the
petitioner against it on 23.09.2014, which is within the
specified period. Besides, in sub-section (6A) of S.88
Cr.P.C . words that “the claim or objection shall be
inquired into” are of much significance which absolutely
speak about inquiry in light of evidence. In light of the
provisions of above subsection of $.88 Cr.P.C. Claim or
objection having been preferred in terms of S.88 Cr.P.C. is
to be essentially put to a judicial inquiry by the Magistrate
by recording the evidence giving a fair opportunity of
proof and rebuttal to the parties. No doubt, the claim of the
petitioner is based on an unregistered Tamleeq deed
scribed in her favour by Wilayat Shah in the year 2007, i.e.
much prior to the year of attachment, but it has been
disbelieved by the two courts below without affording her
an opportunity to prove the same by producing its marginal
witnesses. Similarly, no opportunity has been provided to
the petitioner to rebut the revenue record on the basis of
which the house in question has been attached. The order
of attachment has been passed on the back of the

petitioner. Proper inquiry regarding the claim of the

petitioner as envisaged under section 88 (6A) Cr.P.C.
should have been conducted by the Magistrate by affording
full opportunity of leading evidence. Thus, the impugned
orders of the two courts below are against the law and
principle of natural justice that no one should be
condemned unheard.

9. For what has been discussed above, this
petition is allowed. Impugned orders of the two courts
below are hereby quashed. The case is remanded to the
learned Judicial Magistrate/ Senior Civil Judge Swabi,
with the direction to provide an opportunity of producing
evidence to the parties and then to deice the same afresh in
accordance with law in light of the observations made in
the judgment.

10. Office is directed to send the record to the
learned Senior Civil Judge/Judicial Magistrate Swabi, who
on receipt of the same, shall summon the parties and will
proceed with the case.

Announced
11.01.2016

JUDGE

*M Siraj Afridi PS. D
*M Siraj Afridi PS. D
*M Siraj Afridi PS. D
*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

10
*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

11
*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

12
