JUDGMENT SHEET
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
PESHAWAR
(Judicial Department)

Cr.M.B.A.No.2452-P of 2022.

Date of hearing: 30.09.2022.

Mr.Shaiber Khan, advocate for the
petitioner.

Mr.Muhammad Inam Yousafzai, AAG for the
State.

Nemo for the respondent (despite service).

JUDGMENT

LAL JAN KHATTAK, J.- Petitioner Noor
Haider has applied to this court for his
release on bail in case FIR No.241 dated
02.07.2021 under Sections 302/324/34
PPC/512 Cr.P.C. registered against him at
Police Station Akbarpura, Nowshera.

2. On 02.07.2021, injured Kausar Alam
alias Gujar, now accused in the case,
reported to the local police at casualty of
Civil Hospital, Pabbi to the effect that he and
deceased Iqbal were proceeding to their
homes and when they reached at the place
of occurrence there petitioner Noor Haider,
Afaq, Fayaz and Zarwali were found present
armed with weapons, who on seeing them,
started firing at them with their respective

weapons with which his companion Iqbal
was hit and died on the spot whereas with
the fire shots one passerby Asif too was hit
and got injured. On arrest as accused in the
case, petitioner applied for his release on
bail, which was declined to him by the
learned trial court, hence, this petition.

3. Despite service of father of the
deceased none appeared on his behalf
whereas arguments of learned counsel for
the petitioner as well as of the learned AAG
were heard and case record gone through.
4. Perusal of the case record would
show that though the then injured, namely,
Kausar Alam alias Gujar has alleged in the
FIR that the present petitioner and three
others had fired at him and deceased Iqbal
but subsequently on 16.07.2021 i.e. after a
period of 14 days father of deceased,
namely, Zameer Gul recorded his 164
Cr.P.C. statement wherein he also charged
the then complainant for his abetting the
offence on which he was arrayed as
accused in the case, who on his arrest
sought his release on bail which was
granted to him by this court.

5. It reveals from the record that the

occurrence had taken place at 2100 hours
and apparently no source of light has been
shown in the site plan. So identification of
the petitioner as firer has put a question
mark regarding his participation in the case
which fact has brought his case within the
ambit of further enquiry. Another important
aspect of the case is that co-accused Fayaz
and Zarwali, to whom similar role like that of
the petitioner was attributed, have been
released on bail by the learned trial court
albeit on the basis of compromise. Though
release on bail on the strength of
compromise effected with some co-accused
per se would not be a point for another
accused to his release on bail with whom no
compromise has been made but in case role
of both the accused is identical then grant of
bail to one accused even on the basis of
compromise can be considered for the other
accused as in such like situation it will be
determined after recording evidence that
who out of the two sets of accused had
played effective role in commission of the
offence.

6. For what has been discussed above,
this Court is of the view that the petitioner

has made out a case for his release on bail,
therefore, this bail petition is allowed and it
is directed that he be released on bail
subject to his furnishing bail bonds in the
sum of Rs.100,000/- with two sureties each
in the like amount to the satisfaction of
learned trial court.

JU

Announced.
30.09.2022.

Sadiq Shah CS (SB) (Hon’bie Mr.Justice Lal Jan Khattak)
