)

JUDGMENT SHEET
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
BANNU BENCH
(Judicial Department)
Cr: Mise: BA No. 385-B / 2023
Hafeez Ullah Khan.
Versus
The State etc:
JUDGMENT
Date ofhearing 13.09.2023.

For petitioner: © Mr.Muhammad Rashid
Khan Dirma Khel, advocate.

For the State: Mr.Umer Qayum Khan,
Asstt: A.G.

For respondent: Mr. Khush Amir Khan
Khattak, advocate.

ee oe ac oe 2

FAZAL SUBHAN, J.--- Instant is  a_ bail

application of petitioner Hafeez Ullah Khan s/o
Muhammad Payo r/o Jhangi Killa Pirba Khel,
Tehsil Domel District Bannu, who is seeking his
post-arrest bail in connection with case F.IR
No.347 dated 28.06.2023 registered u/ss
302/324/34 P.P.C, at PS, Domel, District Bannu.

2. In this case, one Fida Ullah while
present with the dead body of his cousin Shah
Hussain s/o Abdul Jabbar at Khalifa Gulnawaz

Hospital (KGN), Bannu reported that he along
with his cousin Shah Hussain, Hafeez Ullah and
Aman Ullah were present near the graveyard of
Jhangi Killa Pirba Khel and at that time Shah
Hussain and Hafeez Ullah were armed with
Kalashnikovs while Aman Ullah was having pistol
when in the meanwhile, an altercation started
between his cousin Shah Hussain on the one hand
and Hafeez Ullah and Aman Ullah on the other
hand who started firing upon Shah Hussain with
the intention for causing his death and as a result
he was hit and got seriously injured, whereafter,
the injured was shifted to the hospital but during
treatment he succumbed to his injuries. Motive for
the occurrence was stated to be altercation prior to
the occurrence.

At the same time, Hafeez Ullah s/o
Muhammad Payo reported in injured condition at
KGN hospital that at the relevant time of
occurrence he was present near the graveyard of
Jhangi Killa Pirba Khel when in the meanwhile,
Shah Hussain s/o Abdul Jabbar came duly armed
with Kalashnikov and on arrival started firing upon
him and as a result he was hit and fell on the

ground and the persons present on the spot shifted
him to the hospital. The same motive of altercation
is stated in the reported.

3. With this background of the case,
arguments of learned counsel for petitioner and
that of learned counsel for complainant assisted by
the learned AAG for the State heard and record
gone through.

4. After hearing the arguments and
tentatively considering the record, it is clear that
two separate reports were lodged in respect of the
same incident and time, place and parties involved
therein are one and the same. It is a matter of
common observation that in such like matters
wherein parties involved in affray, they tend to
suppress and conceal the actual facts to be brought
before the police and it is always difficult for the
courts to arrive at a proper conclusion at bail stage
as to what actually had happened at the time of
occurrence and that which party started aggression
and which of the party was aggressed upon and,
therefore, in a situation of cross-version the only
safe course for the Courts is to extent the benefit of
bail to both the parties of the incident and the

question of perpetrator of aggression is left for the
determination of the trial court. Though grant of
bail in cross-versions is not an absolute rule,
however, the story narrated by both the parties
always make their case one of further inquiry into
the guilt of accused and courts have to lean in
favour of grant of bail keeping in view the
circumstances of each case.

5. From the material collected during
investigation, it is clear that six 7.62 bore empties
were recovered from the place of Hafeez
Ullah/petitioner, whereas, from the place of
deceased Shah Hussain 16 empties of 7.62 bore
were collected. The site-plan in both the reports
were separately prepared which confirms that the
occurrence has taken place near the graveyard of
Jhangi Killa Pirba Khel. The medical evidence
shows that deceased received one fire-arm injury
on his right chest whereas, the petitioner sustained
two injuries on his right arm and hand and two
injuries on left chest. It is also clear from the
available record that prior to the occurrence an
altercation took place between the petitioner and
the deceased which resulted into the firing upon

each other by them, hence, the parties and spot of
occurrence is one and the same and in the incident
both the deceased and the petitioner have received
serious injuries on their bodies and for all practical
purposes the case is of cross-version. In this view
of the matter, the superior courts have always
granted bail to the accused on the ground of further
inquiry into the guilt of the petitioner. In this
regard reliance can safely be placed on the
judgments reported in 2021 P.Cr.L.J Peshawar

(Bannu Bench) 1582, wherein it has been held:-

"6. ----------The moot question for this
Court is to determine as to who was the
aggressor and who was aggressed upon,
which at this juncture is not possible
rather the same can better be determined
after recording pro and contra evidence.
At present this Court is to assess
tentatively the available record without
touching merits of the case. There is no
denial to the fact that both the sides
received injuries; and that the place of
incident, the time of incident and the
persons involved in the episode are one
and the same with a dispute over parking
of a rickshaw, but with their different
versions This fact is alone sufficient to
make the case of the petitioner as one of

Surther inquiry."
6. Similarly, in the case of Adam Khan V
The State & another reported in 2017 P.Cr.L.J

(Peshawar) Note-8, it has been held:-

” In the present case, one person had
lost his life; and in FIR only complainant
had been shown to have sustained firearm
rao “4
yf ONE

2 0 SEP 2923

ba NGTAD.

injuries—Prime consideration in cases of
cross-version, was as to who was the
aggressor, and who was aggressed upon,
and not the injuries caused to one side
only, or that the loss/damage caused to one
party was greater than accused to the
other—Such was not relevant factors and
did not have overriding effect--As to who
had acted in self-defence and who had
attacked, was a matter of further inquiry,
which was yet to be determined during trial
after recording evidence; on the basis of
which case of accused was arguable for the
purpose of bail—Accused was admitted to
bail, in circumstances."

7. For the reasons mentioned above and
while relying on the aforesaid judgments, the case
of petitioner being of cross-versions is open to
further inquiry into his guilt and resultantly the
instant bail petition is allowed and_ the
accused/petitioner is admitted to bail in the instant
case subject to furnishing bail bonds of
Rs.500,000/- (five lacs) with two local, reliable
and men of means sureties each in the like amount,
to the satisfaction of the Illaqa Judicial
Magistrate/MOD, concerned.

8. These are the detailed reasons of the
short order of the even date.

Announced.
13.09.2023. Feo t= >

*Imranullah PS*
JUDGE

[er
