Judgment Sheet

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
PESHAWAR

(Judicial Department)
Cr.M BA No.3751-P/2019
Haji Turab Vs the State

Date of hearing: 01.01.2020
Mr. Farhan Tariq, Advocate, for the petitioner.
Mr. Umar Farooq, AAG, for the State.

Mr. Farman Ali, Advocate, for the complainant.

JUDGMENT

32

AHMAD ALI, J. After having been failed to get the
concession of bail from the learned Trial Court vide order
dated 18.12.2019, the petitioner (Haji Turab), seeks his post
arrest bail in case FIR No. 27 dated 10.12.2019 under
sections 11-(N)/11(F) ATA-1997, P.S. CTD (Mardan).

2.  Succinct facts of the case are that the present accused
petitioner was apprehended by the local police with an
amount of 4840/- of different nominations along with a book
on which “TTA” (Tehreek-e-Taliban Afghanistan) was
written, and when he was found busy in collecting
subscription in the shape of cash amount from the people in
the Bazaar in the name of Jekad and was also instigating
people to join “jehadi outfits’. According, he was booked in
FIR ibid, hence the instant petition for bail.

3. Arguments heard and record gone through.
4. Without dilating upon the merit of the case, suffice it
to say that the accused petitioner is charged with Section
11(N) and 11(F) of the Anti-Terrorism Act, 1997, therefore,
it is deemed appropriate to reproduce said Sections law,
which provides as under:-

11-N, Punishment under Sections 11H to 11K.
Any person who commits an offence under sections 11-
H to 11-K, shall be punishable on conviction with
imprisonment for a term not less than five years and not
exceeding ten years and with fine.

For ready reference Sections 11-H to 11-K are also
reproduced below:-

11H. Fund Raising.

(1) A person commits on offence if he:

(a) invites another to provide money or other property;
and (b) intends that it should be used, or has reasonable
cause to suspect that it may be used, for the purpose of
terrorism 2[or by a terrorist or organization concerned
in terrorism.]

(2) A person commits an offence if:(a) he receives
money or other property; and (b) intends that it should
be used, or has reasonable cause to suspect that it may
be used, for the purposes of terrorism 1[or by a terrorist
or organization concerned in terrorism].

(3) A person commits an offence if he:(a) provides
money or other property; and (b) knows or has
reasonable cause to suspect that it will or may be used
for the purpose of terrorism Ifor by a terrorist or
organization concerned in terrorism].

(4) In this section a reference to the provision of money
or other property is a reference to its being given, lent or
otherwise made available, whether or not for
consideration.

11I. Use and possession.

A person commits an offence if (1) he uses money or
other property for the purposes of terrorism, or

(2) he: (a) possesses money or other property; and

(b) intends that it should be used, or has reasonable
cause to suspect that it may be used, for the purposes of

terrorism.

11J. Funding Arrangements

3[(1) A person commits an offence if he(a) enters into or
becomes concerned in an arrangements as a result of
which money or other property is made available or is to
made available to another; and (b) has reasonable cause
to suspect that it will or may be used for the purposes of
terrorism. 3[(2) Any person in Pakistan or a Pakistani
national outside Pakistan shall commit an offence under
this Act, if he knowingly or willfully makes money or
other property or services available, directly or
indirectly, wholly or jointly, for the benefit of a
proscribed organization or proscribed person.]

11K. Money laundering.

(1) A person commits an offence if he enters into or
becomes concerned in any arrangement which facilitates
the retention or control, by or on behalf of another
person, of terrorist property: (a) by concealment;

(b) by removal from the jurisdiction;

(c) by transfer to nominees;

Whereas, Sections 11(F) provides as under:-

11F. Membership, support and meetings relating to a
Proscribed Organization.(1) A person is guilty

of an offence if he belongs or professes to belong to a
proscribed organization.

(2) A person guilty of an offence under subsection

(1) shall be liable on conviction to a term not

exceeding six months imprisonment and a fine.

(3) A person commits an offence if he:(a) solicits or
invites support for support for a proscribed organization,
and the support is not, or is not

restricted to, the provisions of money or other property;
or

(b) arranges, manages or assists in managing, or
addressing a meeting which he knows is:(i) to support a
Proscribed organization;

(ii) to further the activities of a proscribed organization;
or

(iii) to be addressed by a person who belongs or
professes to belong to a proscribed organization.

(4) A person commits an offence if he addresses a
meeting, or delivers a sermon to a religious gathering,
by any means whether verbal, written, electronic, digital
or otherwise, and the purpose of his address or sermon,
is to encourage support for a proscribed organization or
to further its activities.

(5) A person commits an offence it he solicits, collects
or raises 1[money or other property] for a proscribed
organization.

(6) A person guilty of an offence under subsections
(3),(4), and (5) shall be liable on conviction to a term

of imprisonment, not less than one year and not more
than five years and a fine.

5. Bare perusal of above Sections of law provides that the
punishment for the offences does not fall within the

prohibitory clause of Section 497-Cr.P.C.
6. Even otherwise, when except the solitary statement of
complainant, no other incriminating evidence is available on
file to prima facie connect the accused petitioner with the
commission of offence, his case would require further probe
as provided under Sub-Section (2) of Section 497-Cr.P.C.
Therefore, this Court finds no ground to withhold the
concession of bail, at least, at this stage. Reliance could be

safely placed on PLD 94 P.Cr.L.J 34.

7. Moreover, it has been held time and again by the august
Supreme Court that bail does not mean acquittal of accused but
only change of custody from Government agencies to the sureties,
who on furnishing bonds take responsibility to produce the
accused whenever and wherever required to be produced.

Reliance could be placed on case reported in 2008 SCMR 807

“Haji Muhammad Nazir Vs State”.
8. Before parting with this order, this court finds it

necessary to mention that all the observations recorded above
are tentative assessment just for the disposal of bail petition
and not intended to influence the mind of trial Court, which
is free to appraise the evidence strictly in accordance with
law and merits of the case and; as per law laid down in (1996

SCMR 1845).

9. For what has been discussed above and on tentative
assessment of material available on file a case arguable for

the grant of bail is made out. Consequently, the instant
petition is allowed and the accused-petitioner, named above,
is admitted to bail, provided he furnishes bail bonds in the
sum of Rs.100,000/-, with two sureties each in the like
amount to the satisfaction of learned Ilaga/Duty Judicial
Magistrate, who shall ensure that the sureties are local,
reliable and men of means.

10. Above are the reasons of short order of even date.

Announced:
01.01.2020

JUDGE

Amjad, PS SB ‘Mr. Justice Ahmad Ali
