JUDGMENT SHEET

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
D.L.KHAN BENCH
(Judicial Department)

Cr. Appeal No.12-D/2017

Masood Khan
Vs.
The State
JUDGMENT
Date of hearing: 19.02.2018

Appellant-Petitioner By: M/S Saleem Ullah Khan
Ranazai and Tanveer Ahmad Baloch Advocate

Respondent By: M/S Saifur Rehman Khan Advocate and

Mr. Kamran Hayat Khan Miankhel AAG

SHAKEEL AHMAD, J.- By this single judgment, we
propose to dispose of criminal appeal No. 12-D/2016
filed by the appellant Masood Khan against his
conviction & sentence and Cr. Revision No. 04-D/2016
preferred by the complainant Shoukatullah for
enhancement of sentence of the appellant, as both the
matters have sprung out of the one and same judgment
dated 29.01.2016, passed by the learned Additional
Sessions Judge-I], D.I.Khan, whereby the appellant was
convicted under Section 302(b) PPC and sentenced to
life imprisonment and also held him liable to pay the
compensation of Rs.2,00,000/- to be paid to the legal
heirs of the deceased as provided under section 544-A
Cr.P.C. Benefit of Section 382-B Cr.P.C was extended

to the accused/convict.
-2-

2. The facts of the prosecution case as
disclosed in the FIR = (murasila) Ex:Pw-9/1_ by
Shoukatullah son of Zahoor Khan aged about 25/26
years, brother of the deceased Aftab were that the
complainant Shoukatullah brought his injured
unconscious brother Aftab in Civil Hospital, Kulachi
and reported the matter to the police in its Emergency
Room, and stated that his brother is working in the shop
of one Pappu, on the eventful day at sham-vela, he, his
brother Aftab and Nauman son of Suleman were present
in the shop, in the meanwhile his paternal uncle
Masood/convict duly armed with 30 bore pistol came
there and while standing at the door of the shop raised
lalkara stating that “Aaj Bach ker nahi jao gay” and
opened firing at him with his pistol with the intention to
kill him, as a result of firing, his brother sustained
injuries on abdomen and wrist of right arm and became
unconscious. He could do nothing being empty handed.
After commission of offence, the accused fled away
from the spot. Subsequently, the injured succumbed to
his injuries. The occurrence was witnessed by Nauman,
besides the complainant. The motive as alleged in the
FIR is that an altercation had taken place between
deceased and accused 3/4 days prior to the occurrence.

3. After completion of usual investigation,

complete challan was submitted against — the
-3-

accused/convict under section 512 CrP.C on
20.11.2013, and he was declared proclaimed offender
vide order dated 08.4.2014. The accused was arrested on
25.9.2014, whereafter, he was put to trial. After
compliance of provision of Section 265-C Cr.P.C,
charge was framed against the appellant on 15.12.2014,
to which, he pleaded not guilty and claimed trial

4. In order to prove its case the prosecution
examined as many as 12 witnesses. Statement of the
appellant was also recorded under section 342 Cr.P.C,
wherein, he denied the allegations, but neither opted to
make his statement on oath as provided under section
340 (2) Cr.PC nor did adduce any defence. After hearing
the arguments advanced by the learned counsel
appearing on both side, the learned Additional Sessions
Judge-II, D.I.Khan convicted and _ sentenced the
appellant as mentioned above, hence, the instant appeal
and criminal revision.

5. It is, inter alia, contended by the learned
counsel for the appellant that it is an un-witnessed crime,
though, Nauman has been cited as an eye-witness of the
alleged occurrence, however, he was abandoned by the
prosecution, which amounts to withholding the best
evidence available with the prosecution and his non-
production would be hit by Article 129(g) of the

Qanoon-e-Shahadat Order,1984; that the complainant is
-4-

serving in Pak Army and was posted in Khashmir
Chump Sector during the days of occurrence; that
neither the dead body of the deceased was identified by
the complainant nor autopsy was conducted on the same
day, which clearly suggests that the appellant was not
present at the spot; that the occurrence took place in the
‘bazar’ but non amongst the locality has been examined
to corroborate the version of the complainant, even the
statement of one Pappu in whose shop the deceased was
working was not recorded by the police in support of the
contention of the complainant; that the medico-legal
report is in conflict with the ocular account furnished by
the complainant; that the trial court has based conviction
of the appellant on the suggestion put to PW-9
Investigating Officer of the case, which is alien to law;
that complainant is the real brother of the deceased,
therefore, no reliance can be placed on his statement and
no conviction can be based on his solitary statement; that
the prosecution has miserably failed to prove its case
against the appellant beyond a ray of doubt.

5. Conversely, the learned counsel for the
complainant assisted by the learned Additional Advocate
General jointly contended that the prosecution has
proved its case against the appellant beyond any shadow
of doubt; that the convict is paternal uncle of the

complainant ruling out the possibility mis-identification
-5-

and false implication; that the solitary statement of the
complainant is unambiguous, reliable and confidence
inspiring and his simple statement can be based for
conviction; that the version of the complainant, site plan
and medico-legal report, if placed in a juxta position are
consistent inter alia; that the motive as alleged has been
proved. He lastly argued that the learned trial court has
reached to the conclusion that the appellant was guilty of
the charges levelled against him, however, he assailed
the judgment to the extent that lesser punishment has
been awarded to him and sought enhancement of the
same contending that the convict deserves normal
penalty of death.

6. We have heard the arguments of the
learned counsel for the parties and have perused the
record including the impugned judgment minutely.

7. The prosecution rested its case on the
ocular testimony, furnished by PW-11, brother of
deceased, the motive, medical evidence, of course, given
by Dr. Muhammad Younas, SMO, PW-4 who had
examined the then injured (now deceased) and after death
performed postmortem examination and his opinion
Ex:PW-4/1, Ex:PW-4/2, and Ex:PM, and recoveries
from the scene of crime i.e blood through cotton Ex:P-I,
two empties of 30 bore pistol Ex:P-2 and bloodstained

garments of the deceased brought by Constable
-6-

Jamshaid Ex.P-3. The FSL report Ex.PK vide which it
was opined that two 30 bore empties were fired from
one and the same 30 bore weapon. The FSL report
Ex.PW-3/6 vide which it was reported that the
bloodstained cotton and shirt were found to be of human
blood and of the same group, abscondance of accused
for one year, 03 months and 24 days and site plan
Ex.PB.

8. We have considered the arguments of the
learned counsel for the parties from both the sides
keeping in view the settled principles governing the
appreciation of evidence and dispensation of Justice in
criminal matters and have found no ground to interfere
with the impugned judgment of the learned trial court.

9. The ocular account, as stated above, was
furnished by complainant Shoukatullah, PW-11 brother
of the deceased Aftab, who deposed in simple words that
on the eventful day, he alongwith his brother and
Nauman (cousin) were present in the shop, his uncle
Masood came there and stood at the door and said “aaj
bach ker nahi jao gy” thereafter fired at the deceased
due to which, the deceased sustained injuries on his
belly and right wrist. The medical and circumstantial
evidence fully support and corroborate the statement of
complainant. According to MLC Ex.PW-4/1, injury

sheets Ex.PW-4/2 and post-mortem report Ex.PM, the
-7-

deceased had sustained firearm injuries and seat of
injuries were in the right sub costal region and on right
wrist posteriorly. Perusal of the site plan reveals that two
empties of 30 bore were recovered from the scene of
occurrence, these empties were sent to the FSL, where it
was opined that these were fired from one and the same
crime weapon. In this case single accused, who happens
to be uncle of the complainant was charged for
committing murder of his nephew (brother of the
complainant) ruling out the possibility of mis-
identification.

10. The defence also failed to create doubt
about the presence of complainant on the spot rather his
presence on the spot was confirmed by the defence
counsel by putting a positive question to PW-9 in the
following words:-

“It is correct that at the time of
occurrence three persons were
present in the shop of mobile ie
Aftab (deceased), complainant
Shoukatullah and PW Nauman.

Moreso, the complainant is also witness of
recovery memo Ex.PW-9/1, vide which recoveries were
made from the spot, which too proves his presence on
the spot.

11. We would also like to observe that though

the complainant Shoukatullah is real brother of the

deceased has been rightly believed by the learned trial
-8-

court. He, undoubtedly, was a witness of the occurrence
which took place in his presence with no possibility of
mistaken identity. Being a brother of the deceased, he
would not allow the real culprit to escape by implicating
an innocent person. The question as to whether the
conviction can be based on the testimony of a single
witness or not, the answer is, obviously, in affirmative.
In this respect, we are fortified by the judgment reported

in case titled Allah Bakhsh V. Shammi (PLD 1980

S.C 225) wherein it has been held that conviction can be
based on the testimony of a single witness if the same is
found reliable by the court.

12. Converting to the plea of the appellant that
the deceased was related to the complainant, therefore,
no credibility can be attached to it. This contention is
erroneous and based on misconception. It is now
consistent view of the superior courts in Pakistan that
mere relationship with the deceased is not sufficient to
discard his evidence unless he is proved to have an
ulterior motive to involve the accused in the case. In this
respect, reliance can be placed on the case of Dildar

Hussain V. Muhammad Afzaal alias Chala and 3

others (PLD 2004 Supreme Court 663) wherein it was

held as under:-

“Relationship of the witness with

the complainant party alone is not
-9.

sufficient to discard his evidence
unless he is proved to have an
ulterior motive to involve the

accused in the case”

13. Coming to the objection of the learned
counsel for the appellant that time of occurrence was
given by the complainant as ‘sham-wela’ instead of
exact time of occurrence, to cover up the delay in
lodging the FIR is erroneous. The PW-11 was cross-
examined at great length, but no dent could be caused in
his statement. Nothing could be brought on record to
show that exact time of occurrence was not given to
cover up the delay in lodging the FIR. The PWs were
not cross-examined on these lines. The objection of the
learned counsel can be answered from another angle, the
occurrence took place in the month of May, the ‘sham
vela’ i.e time of evening prayers or prior to that in the
end of month can safely be held to fall in between 7.00
PM to 7.30 PM and time of lodging report was given as
7.50 which seems to be promptly lodged report ruling
out the possibility of consultation and deliberation some
time must have consumed in taking the deceased to the
hospital for providing medical treatment where report
was lodged, therefore, it cannot be termed as delay.

14. Now adverting to the contention of the

learned counsel for the appellant that non-examination
-10-

of PW Nauman is fatal to the prosecution case. The
reason for non-production of the said prosecution
witness was plausibly explained by PW-10 in his cross-

examination in the following words:-
I recorded the statement of eye-
witness Noman on _ 20.7.2013.
Witness volunteer that the said
eye-witness asked me __ that
although I am eyewitness of the
occurrence but I am unable to
become witness because there is a
personal enmity between the
parties who are closely related to
each other and it will create
problems for me to become the

witness.

The plain reading of the aforesaid portion of the
cross-examination of PW-10 shows that Nauman avoided
to appear as prosecution witness to avoid annoyance/
enmity with the accused. It is now consistent view of the
superior Courts that in view of social condition prevalent
in the society people avoid to poke their nose in the
affairs of other people, therefore, non-production of
Nauman or private witness from the locality is not fatal to
the prosecution case. In this respect, reliance can well be

placed on the case of Mumtaz Khan V. The State

(1993 P.Cr.L.J 333 Lahore) wherein it was held that:-

-l1ll-

“Non-production of some independent
witnesses by itself was no ground to
disbelieve ocular version furnished by
prosecution witness in view of fact that
normally people avoid to become eye-
witnesses in a murder case to avoid

wrath of accused party”

Reference can also be made to the cases

titled Awais and another V. The State and_another

(2004 _P_Cr.L.] 377) Peshawar, Safeer Ahmad and

others V. The State (2015 P Cr. L [ 1380) Lahore and

Rashid alias Baou Masih Vs The State (2006 YLR

2180) Lahore.

15. After commission of offence the accused
remained absconder for a period of one year, three
months and 24 days. No doubt, that it is consistent view
of the august Supreme Court of Pakistan that mere
abscondance of an accused after commission of crime
does not serve to establish accused’s guilt, however, it
gives supportive corroboration to prosecution evidence.
Reference in this behalf may be made from the Judgment

of this Court reported as Bashir v. The State (PLD 1974

Peshawar 113)

16. The motive as asserted by the prosecution
could not be proved and the actual motive remained
shrouded in mystery, therefore, the conviction and
sentenced recorded by the learned trial court does not

warrant interference and sentence of imprisonment for
-12-

life is sufficient to meet the ends of justice. A reference

in this respect may be made to the case titled Hag

Nawaz Vs State (2018 SCMR 21) wherein it was held as

under:-

S. 302(b) Qatl-i-amd .... Sentence,
reduction in... Death sentence
reduced to imprisonment for life ...
mitigating circumstances... Motive
not proved... where the
prosecution asserted a motive but
failed to prove the same then such
failure on the part of the
prosecution may react against a
sentence of death passed against a
convict on the charge of murder.

(p.23) B.

In this respect, reliance can also be placed

on the case titled Nadeem Ramzan V. The State (2018

SCMR 149). Reference is also made to the case titled

Ghulam _Muhammad_ and another V. The_ State

(2017 SCMR 2048) and another, wherein the sentence

of death was reduced to imprisonment for life on the
ground that the motive as alleged by the prosecution was
not believed by the High Court.

17. For what has been discussed above, we
find no illegality, mis-reading or non-reading of
evidence in the impugned judgment, therefore, the same

is maintained and the appeal as well as revision for
-13-

enhancement of sentence being bereft of merits are

dismissed.
Announced.
Dt: 19.02.2018
Hasnain/*
JUDGE
JUDGE
(D.B)

Hon’ble Mr. Justice Ijaz Anwar
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad
