JUDGMENT SHEET
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
BANNU BENCH.

(Judicial Department)

Cr. Misc: B.A No. 423-B/2023.

Zamin Ullah
Vs
The State and another.

JUDGMENT

Date of hearing 14.9.2023

For petitioner:- | Mr. Muhammad Rashid Khan Dirma
Khel, Advocate.

For State:- Mr. Habib Ullah Khan, AAG.
For respondents:- Mr. Muhammad Saleem Awan,
Advocate.
Sei OK Ke aie oe ke ke

FAZAL SUBHAN, J.-_. Through instant petition the

petitioner Zaminullah son of Zaley Mir seeks his release on
bail in connection with case FIR No.03 dated 24.8.2023
registered under sections 5 (2) PC Act/161 PPC of Police
Station Anti-Corruption Establishment, District Bannu.

2. In this case one Rashid Ullah son of Gul Khan
reported to the officer incharge police station Anti-
Corruption Establishment, Bannu on 24.8.2023 that he has
purchased 30 marlas of land from one Sibghat Ullah Shah

and when he contacted the Patwari Halqa for attestation of
mutation, he demanded Rs.2,40,000/- for that purpose,
whereafter he handed over Rs.1,40,000/- to him but the
Patwari Halga is still demanding the remaining amount,
however, he is not ready to bow down to his demand or to
pay the gratification, hence offered himself to become a trap
agent. The report of the complainant was reduced in the
shape of present FIR, whereafter application was submitted
to the learned District & Sessions Judge, Bannu for
appointment of a raiding Magistrate and Mr. Abdul Qayum,
Civil Judge, Bannu was accordingly deputed for the purpose
of raid. On the same day a raid was conducted and petitioner
was arrested along with bribe money of Rs.1,00,000/-. After
his arrest he applied for grant of bail in the Court of learned
Special Judge Anti-Corruption Southern District
Headquarters at Bannu, however, he failed to secure his bail,
hence the petitioner has come up with the instant bail
application.

3. Learned counsel for petitioner in his arguments
submitted that the complainant after purchase of 30 marlas
of land was to pay Government dues and taxes in accordance
with law and that as per calculation mentioned in para No.4
of the petition, the complainant was to pay different kinds of

taxes at the market value of the land i.e. Rs.18,50,000/- ,
which include 2% mutation fee, 2% MC fee, 3% FBR tax
and 6% another FBR tax which comes to 30% of the total
market value and in this way the complainant was to pay
Rs.2,40,000/- as taxes. That complainant paid Rs.1,40.000/-
and was to pay the rest of the amount of Rs.1,00,000/- at the
time of attestation of mutation. That the mutation of the
complainant has already been entered and was to be attested
subject to payment of Rs. 1,00,000/-, however, a false and
fake raid was conducted to rope the petitioner in the instant
case. His contention is that the amount recovered from the
petitioner was not a gratification rather it was part of the
Government taxes on the attestation of mutation. He next
submitted that section 5(2) PC Act provides maximum
punishment for 07 years which does not fall within the
prohibitory clause of section 497 Cr.P.C and grant of bail in
such offences is a rule and refusal an exception.

4. Learned counsel for complainant on the other
hand submitted that after observing all legal formalities in
respect of the raid, Magistrate was deputed to supervise the
raid and during the raid Rs.1,00,000/- gratification amount
was recovered from the direct possession of the petitioner.
His contention is that total taxes payable on the mutation

were Rs.1,60,150/-, whereas the petitioner was demanding
Rs.2,40,000/-. According to him under section 42-A of the
West Pakistan Land Revenue Act, the fee or taxes payable
on the mutation were to be paid on the date on which the
revenue officer has to pass an order on the mutation and as
no mutation has been attested so far, therefore, the demand
of the petitioner was illegal and, therefore, being arrested on
the spot with tainted money, hence he is not entitled for grant
of bail.

5. After hearing the above arguments and tentative
assessment of record, irrespective of the fact that the process
of raid etc was conducted in accordance with law and rules,
however, the main question yet to be determined is as to
whether the complainant, who wanted the attestation of
mutation of 30 marlas of land in his favour was to pay
Rs.2,40,000/- as Government taxes or the petitioner was
demanding excess amount as illegal gratification.
Admittedly, mutation has already been entered and the
revenue officer is to attest the same subject to payment of
remaining amount. Record shows that petitioner has already
issued a receipt of Rs. 1,40,000/- to the complainant. In
such an eventuality a prima facie arguable case is made out
by the petitioner in his favour. The offence for which the

petitioner is charges carries maximum punishment of 07
years which does not falls within the prohibitory clause of
section 497 Cr.P.C and grant of bail in such like cases is a
rule and refusal an exception. In identical case “Muhammad
Afzal-Vs- State” reported in 2005 P.Cr.L.J Lahroe 1814, it
was held in the following manner:-

“ The offence do not fall within the

prohibitory clause, thus, entitling him to the

grant of bail and in such like case, grant of

bail is a rule and refusal thereto is an

exception. Respectfully reliance is placed on

PLD 1995 SC 34. The petitioner is a

Government servant and there is no

likelihood of his absconding.”
6. In light of the material available on file this
petition is accepted and the petitioner is released on bail
subject to furnishing bail bonds of Rs.5,00,000/-(Rupees
Five Lac) with two local and reliable sureties each in the like
amount to the satisfaction of trial Court/ Illaqa Judicial
Magistrate/ MOD concerned.

These are the detailed reasons of my short

order of even date.

Announced.
14.9.2023.

Thsan.*/- .. ee a
JUDGE.

(S.B)
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Fazal Subhan.

\S
Y 19 SEP 2023

apa mab
