Judgment Sheet

PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, MINGORA BENCH (DAR-UL-QAZA),
SWAT.

JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT

Cr.M No.299-M/2017.
JUDGMENT
Date of hearing...12/0 7/2017... cc ccc ccc ic cen cee cen tee cee cents tee te ee tee tae tee eee teats
Petitioners (Zar Nasib Khan & Israr Uddin) By Mr.M.Saeed Khan Shangla,
AAVOCAULEC..eeecceeceeseeseeeteseseeseesenecseaesaecseeseeseeseesseecececaecaeeseeseesteesiesieeaeereereneenees
State by Barrister Asad Hamidur REAMAML........cccccecceceececeeteeteeeeesenseneenetteneeeees
Respondent By Mr.Muhammad Ikram Klan ii. i. cc cee ccc cee cee cee ee te cee ettee aes

MUHAMMAD NASIR MAHFOOZ, _J:- Having
failed to obtain their release on bail from the courts
below, petitioners Zar Nasib Khan and Israr Uddin have
filed the instant petition seeking bail in case FIR
No.370 dated 18.04.2017 under section 489-F PPC

registered at police station Chitral.

2. According to the contents of FIR, petitioners
are charged for issuance of two cheques to the
complainant/respondent, which on presentation to the
concerned Bank, were dishonoured for insufficient

amount.

3. Learned counsel for the petitioners besides his
submissions relating to the subject matter of the instant

FIR has also placed on file copies of two orders passed
by the Hon'ble Peshawar High Court, Peshawar in
W.P.No.441-P/2016 and W.P.No.442-P/2016 wherein
the Hon'ble Court has restrained the NAB authorities
from arresting the petitioners till conclusion of trial. He
stated that there is six months delay in lodging of FIR
and authority letter was issued by the complainant for
the works to be carried on in constituency of NA.33 and
34. He contended that liability lies on three different
persons out of whom two are petitioners before this
court and one Ajmal Khan is absconder and being a
joint business between the petitioners and complainant
it is a nature of civil dispute. He further submitted that
on 14.04.2017 the I.O has also given opinion in favour
of the petitioners. He further contended that the
petitioners are not habitual offenders and the case
against them is one of further inquiry and the offence
with which the petitioners are charged does not fall
within the ambit of prohibitory clause of Section 497
Cr.P.C, therefore, they are entitled to the concession of
bail. He placed reliance on 2000 P.Cr.L.J. 814, 2009
P.Cr.L.J. 325, 2011 SCMR 1708, 2013 P.Cr.L.J.
1756, 2015 P.Cr.L.J. 129 and 2016 YLR 202.

4. Conversely, learned counsel for the

complainant strongly resisted the grant of bail to the
accused-petitioners and submitted that petitioners are
directly charged in the FIR and has caused financial
loss to him. He also referred to section 489-F PPC that
if on the one hand the case does not fall within the
prohibitory clause of Section 497 Cr.P.C then the latter
part of the said section provides that the burden of proof
shall rest on the accused to the effect that he had made
arrangements with his bank to ensure that the cheque
would be honoured and that the bank was at fault in not
honouring the cheque, therefore, the petitioner could
not be absolved of the liability. He also submitted that
release of the petitioner in the NAB case has got no
nexus with this case and placed reliance on 2002
SCMR 1997 and 2017 YLR 694, hence, requests for
dismissal of the instant bail petition. The learned State
counsel assist the court and referred to 2009 SCMR
174.

I have heard the arguments of learned counsel
for the parties and gone through the available record.
5. Notwithstanding the fact that punishment
provided for offence under section 489-F PPC may
extended to 3 years or with fine or both but in the
present case the parties have executed an agreement

deed on 12.08.2015 arising out of the subject matter of
dispute of the present FIR, copies of the said agreement
have been perused wherein although present petitioner
No.1 has accepted certain liabilities for payment of
certain amount towards satisfaction of the claim of
complainant/respondent and thereafter he failed to
fulfill that responsibility. Without dilating upon the
merits of the case lest it may prejudice proceedings
before the learned courts below, it would be sufficient
to hold that the offence does not fall within the
prohibitory clause of Section 497 Cr.P.C for
dishonestly issuing the cheques and it is yet to be seen
that the accused-petitioners had any intention to cheat
or defraud the complainant/respondent. Record reveals
that challan has been submitted in the court and the
accused/petitioners are no more required for further
inquiry. Moreover, the contentions raised in the FIR
makes it a case of further inquiry as they are already
facing prosecution by NAB Authorities. The judgments
cited by the learned counsel for the complainant have
got distinguishing features as in some cases bail was
refused being a habitual offender and in other cases the
accused had made voluntary confession. Moreover,

there is no likelihood of absconsion or apprehension of
tempering with the prosecution evidence as_ the
petitioners are stated to be men of means.

Thus, for the reasons discussed above, this
petition is allowed and consequently the petitioners are
directed to be released on bail provided they furnish
bail bonds in the sum of Rs.1,000,000/- (one million)
each with two sureties each in the like amount to the
satisfaction of Illaqa/Duty Judicial Magistrate, who
shall ensure that the sureties are local, reliable and men
of means.

Above are the reasons for my earlier short order

of even date.

Announced. JUDGE
Dt.12/07/2017.
