JUDGMENT SHEET

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT
PESHAWAR
(Judicial Department)

Cr.A.No.22-P of 2014.
Date of hearing: 21.09.2017.

Mr.Muhammad Tariq Kakar, advocate for
appellant.

Mr. Mujahid Ali Khan, AAG for State.
Respondent No.2/complainant Mst. Yasmin
in person.

JUDGMENT

LAL JAN KHATTAK, J.- This
criminal appeal is directed against the
judgment dated 17.12.2013 of the learned
Additional Sessions Judge, Shabqadar
Charsadda delivered in case FIR No.305
dated 11.04.2012 u/s 302 PPC of
Police Station Abdul Hameed Shaheed
Shabqadar District Charsadda, whereby the
appellant has been’ convicted and
sentenced u/s 302 (b) PPC to imprisonment
for life. He was ordered to pay
compensation of Rs.1,00,000/- payable to
the legal heirs of the deceased within the
meaning of Section 544-A Cr.P.C or in
default whereof to further undergo six
months S.|. Benefit u/s 382-b Cr.P.C was

also extended to him.
2. Brief facts of the case are that on
11.4.2012 Mst. Yasmeen (PW-8) reported to
S.1. Saifullah Khan (PW-11) to the effect that
she alongwith her son-in-law Javed Khan
had come to see her daughter Mst.Shehla.
In the meanwhile, an altercation took place
between her daughter and the appellant
over ornaments on which the appellant got
infuriated and took out pistol from the folder
of his shalwar and fired at her daughter with
which she was hit and died on the spot. The
complainant charged the appellant i.e. her
son-in-law for the murder of her daughter.
Motive for the crime was given as a dispute

over ornaments between the spouses.

3. On arrest of the accused and
completion of investigation, the case was
put in court, which indicted the appellant for
the offence to which he pleaded not guilty
and claimed trial. In order to prove its case
prosecution examined 12 witnesses
whereafter statement of the accused was
recorded, wherein, he professed his
innocence. The learned trial court, after
conclusion of the trial, found the appellant

guilty of the charge and while recording his
conviction sentenced him as mentioned

above, hence the instant appeal.

4. Arguments heard and _ record
perused.
5. Perusal of the case record would

show that in support of the allegations
contained in the FIR (Ex.PA), Mst. Yasmeen
appeared before the court as PW-8 and
deposed in line with what she had alleged in
her report. Pertinent aspect of the case is
that one Javed Khan, who was cited in the
FIR as an eyewitness to the crime, was
abandoned by the prosecution for the
reason to avoid before the court repetition of
the incident. The reason advanced by the
prosecution in support of abandonment of
PW Javed Khan does not seem to be
plausible as the complainant was the sole
eyewitness of the case and in order to give
corroboration and credence to _ her
testimony, examination of Javed Khan as
prosecution witness was very vital and
material because solitary eye version
account of a related eyewitness is seldom
made a base for recording a conviction

unless strong corroboration comes_ in
support of what the solitary eyewitness has
deposed. As the statement given by the sole
eyewitness of the case has not been
supported through any independent source
of evidence or through any circumstantial
evidence of the case, therefore, we are
unable to rely upon the testimony furnished

by PW-8 for its lacking corroboration.

6. No doubt, there is confessional
statement of the appellant recorded on the
3" day of his arrest but the ibid statement is
of no help to the prosecution for basing
conviction for the reason that it goes quite
contrary to what the complainant had
alleged in her report. In the FIR (Ex.PA), the
complainant has alleged that in her view the
appellant took out pistol from the folder of
his shalwar and fired at her daughter but in
the confessional statement, it has been
stated by the appellant that early in the
morning when was asleep, his wife had hit
him with a stone on which he got infuriated
and took out a loaded pistol lying in the
room and fired at her on her head with
which she died. If the confessional

statement and contents of the FIR are put in
juxtaposition with each other, then it would
appear that each document contradicts the
other, as in the FIR it is the prosecution
case that in presence of the complainant,
the appellant had fired at the deceased
while in the confessional statement, it is
mentioned that after the occurrence, the
appellant-accused had _ informed the
complainant about the occurrence on cell
phone. It appears that there is no
consistency and coherence between the
confessional statement and the FIR for
which the confessional statement cannot be

relied upon for lack of corroboration to it.

7. Not only that the confessional
statement has negated the prosecution
story as narrated in the FIR but it seemed to
us that same was not voluntary one and
was the result of fear and promise. Pertinent
is the question No.7 put to the appellant
before recording his statement, which is
reproduced as under:-

Q7 Have you been told that you
will be made an approver?

Ans. Yes

Above referred question and answer

would show that the confessional statement
was extracted from the appellant as a quid
pro quo. Careful perusal of the above
question and answer would show that had
there been no offer of approver to the
appellant by the Magistrate, then he would

not have opted to admit his guilt.

8. It is well settled that in order to record
conviction of an accused on the strength of
confessional statement alone, the court
shall see with utmost care and caution that
the confession is free from all sorts of
duress, pressure, promise or inducement
etc. In case any of the above cited elements
is found missing in the confessional
statement, then for the safe administration
of justice same should not be relied upon for
recording a conviction. As the confessional
statement of the appellant suffers from the
inherent defects and does not appear to
be voluntary one, therefore, we are unable

to accept it.

9. If solitary statement of the
complainant and the confessional statement
are put out of consideration, then there
remains nothing to support the prosecution

case as set up against the appellant.
Besides, the prosecution for no valid reason
had abandoned the independent witness,
namely, Javed Khan, which fact has caused
colossal damage to its case for which it shall

suffer.

10. Thorough and careful examination of
the case record would show that the
presence of sole eyewitness on the spot is
not established through reliable and
confidence inspiring evidence, hence, her
testimony cannot be accepted. The case
against the appellant has not been proved
beyond any shadow of doubt, which is hall
mark of criminal jurisprudence. The learned
trial court has not appreciated the case
evidence in its true prospective and has
wrongly convicted the appellant for which its

judgment is not sustainable.

11. For what has been discussed above,
we accept the instant appeal, set aside the
impugned judgment and resultantly acquit
the appellant of the charge leveled against
him. He be set free forthwith, if not required

to be detained in any other case.

12. Above are the reasons of our short

order of even date, which reads as under:-
“For the reasons to be recorded later,
this appeal is allowed, conviction and
sentence of the appellant recorded by
the learned Additional Sessions
Judge, Shabqadar (Charsadda) vide
the impugned judgment
dated 17.12.2013 in case FIR No.305
dated 11.04.2012 u/s 302 PPC of
Police Station Abdul Hameed
Shaheed Shabqadar District
Charsadda, are set aside. The
appellant is acquitted of the charge
leveled against him and he be set
free forthwith, if not required or

wanted in any other case”.

JUDGE

JUDGE

Announced
21.09.2017.

Sadiq Shah, PS (DB) (Hon'ble Justice Lal Jan Khattak,, Hon'ble Mr. Justice Qalandar Ali Kfian)
