JUDGEMENT SHEET
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
BANNU BENCH

(Judicial Department)

J.Cr.A No. 422-B of 2016.

Sadiq Ali
Vs
The State etc:

JUDGEMENT

Date of hearing 10.01.2017

Appellant-Petitioner: By Muhammad _ Salim

Awan, Advocate.

Respondent: By Anwar-ul-Hagq, Fagqir

Mehboob-ul-Hamid, Hujjat

Ullah Khan & Kazim Raza

Marwat, Advocates.

ABDUL SHAKOOR, J.--- Sadiq Ali appellant,

was booked in case FIR No.303 of 2014

registered, Police Station Lakki District Lakki

Marwat under Section. 302 PPC, for the murder of

his wife, after full dressed trial he was convicted

for the alleged murder of his wife by the learned

Additional Sessions Judge-IV, camp court Lakki

Marwat vide judgment dated 03.11.2016 and was

(D.B) Justice Ikramullah Khan and Justice Abdul Shakoor
-2-

sentenced to imprisonment for life. He was further

held liable to pay Rs.16,00,000/- (Sixteen lacs) as

compensation under Section. 544-A Cr.P.C to the

legal heirs of deceased (excluding appellant) as

arrears of land revenue and shall undergo six

months imprisonment in default. The benefit of

Section. 382-B Cr.P.C was extended to him.

Hence, this appeal.

2- We may mention here _ that

complainant and State have preferred Criminal

Revisions No. 07-B of 2017 and No. 11-B of 2017

for enhancement of life imprisonment of appellant

to death penalty.

3- We have considered the submissions

of learned counsel for the parties and carefully

gone through record with their valuable

assistance.

4- It is noticed that facts of this case and

evidence produced before the trial Court find a

detail discussion in the judgment passed by the

(D.B) Justice Ikramullah Khan and Justice Abdul Shakoor
-3-

learned Additional Sessions Judge-IV District

Lakki Marwat, therefore, the same need not to be

discussed and reproduced here in simply to avoid

duplication and unnecessary repetition.

J5- The crux of the prosecution case is

that at the relevant time, date and place, the

appellant and his wife suddenly developed a

quarrel and on the basis thereof appellant was

enraged and caused fire-arm injury to his wife

with .30 bore pistol, which injury led to her death.

The FIR in this respect had been lodged by none

other than the son of the appellant. The appellant,

in his statement recorded under Section. 342

Cr.P.C had maintained that he had not caused an

injury to his wife namely-Robina Shaheen

deceased, rather on the eventful day his minor

daughter Fatima came inside the house weeping

and told him that her mother (deceased) was

abused by one Barkat in the street, on this he took

his pistol and rushed towards main gate of his

(D.B) Justice Ikramullah Khan and Justice Abdul Shakoor
-4-

house, there his wife entered through main gate

and hurriedly pushed him back and over-powered

pistol, which was already loaded went off in her

hands and hit her. In this regard appellant had

failed to lead any independent evidence to

substantiate and establish his said plea taken by

him.

6- A bare perusal of the FIR, the

statement of sole eye-witness, i.e, son of the

appellant and findings recorded by the trial court,

there was no previous motive for the commission

of offence and the incident in issue had erupted all

of sudden without any pre-mediation, whatsoever.

The medical evidence shows that the deceased

had received one shot of pistol on her body, i.e, a

fire-arm entry wound on inner angle of left eye

size % cm and 2 cm, charring marks were present,

which shows injury had been caused to deceased

very closely and may be a result of over powering

of pistol. Eye witness had stated in his

(D.B) Justice Ikramullah Khan and Justice Abdul Shakoor
-5-

examination-in-chief that his mother, i.e, deceased

was not allowing the appellant his father from

going outside the house, while he was holding .30

bore pistol in hand. These facts of the case

squarely attract Exception-4 contained in the

erstwhile provision of Section.300 PPC, as it has

already been held by the Apex Court in the cases,

Piran Ditta V. The State (1993 SCMR 1934) and

Ali Muhammad V. Ali Muhammad and another

(PLD 1996 SC 274) and the principle rendered in

the said cases is followed by the Apex Court in

Cases Azmatullah V. The State (2014 SCMR

1178) and Zeeshan Shahni V. The State (PLD

2017 SC 165).

7- Keeping in view the facts and

circumstances of the case, this appeal is partially

allowed, the conviction of appellant for the

offence under Section. 302 (b) PPC is converted

into that for an offence under Section. 302 (c)

PPC and consequently his sentence is reduced

(D.B) Justice Ikramullah Khan and Justice Abdul Shakoor
-6-

from life imprisonment (twenty five years) to

imprisonment for ten (10) years by leaving the

compensation of Rs.16,00,000/- (Sixteen lacs)

awarded to legal heirs of deceased (excluding

appellant) under Section. 544-A Cr.P.C and

benefit of Section. 382-B Cr.P.C extended to

appellant intact.

8. As we have partly allowed the appeal of the

appellant, whereby his life imprisonment is

reduced to imprisonment for ten (10) years,

consequently Criminal Revisions No.07-B of

2017 and 11-B of 2017 stand dismissed.

Announced
10.01.2017
JUDGE.
*Tmranullah*
JUDGE.

(D.B) Justice Ikramullah Khan and Justice Abdul Shakoor
