-l-

’ JUDGMENT SHEET
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
MINGORA BENCH (DAR-UL-QAZA), SWAT
(Judicial Department)

Cr.A No. 229-M/2019

Syed Zanon Mian and 04 others
Vous

Mst. Misslunisa wife of Mian Sher resident of Kalakot, Tehsil Matta
District Swat. :

Present: ;
Mr. Masood-ur-Rehman), Advocate for
the appellants.

Muhammad Nabi, Advocate for respondent.

Mr. Asad-ur-Rehman, Advocate as Amicus
Curie.

Date of hearing: 10.09.2020

JUDGMENT

ISHTIAQ IBRAHIM, J.- Through this appeal, the
appellants have challenged the judgment dated
04.05.2019 of the learned Additional Sessions
Judge, Swat at Matta whereby though they were
acquitted. in complaint u/s 3 of the Illegal
Dispossession Act, 2005 filed by respondent/
complainant Mst. Misslunisa but they were ordered

to restore possession of her shari share.

2. ' Brief facts of the case are that the
respondent/complainant filed a complaint u/s 3 of
the Illegal Dispossession Act, 2005 (the Act ©
henceforth) against the present appellants. with

assertions that she and appellants No. 1 to 3 are

Tajamul/Ps*

S.B: n’bh im -
-2-
successors of common predecessor namely
Manjawar Mian. On the death of the said
predecessor, his property devolved upon his legal
heirs including the complainant whose name was
duly entered in the revenue record. In order to grab
her shari share, appellants No. 1 to 3 and father of
appellant No.4 filed a civil suit against her which
was dismissed till the august Supreme Court of

Pakistan. Thereafter, the complainant separated her

' shari share through revenue Court and possession

thereof was handed over to her in accordance with
law which she retained since 18.03.2016 till 10:00
A.M of 21.03.2016. The complainant alleged in her
complaint that on 21.03.2016 at 10: A.M when she
alongwith her husband Mian Sher and witnesses
Momin Khan and Abdur Rauf visited her landed
property, they found appellant Syed Zanon armed
with Kalashnikov whereas appellants No. 2 to 4
were holding mattocks and they were demolishing
the boundary line of her land established by revenue
Court. When they tried to stop the accused, the latter
abused them and threatened them for life in case of
not vacating the land. Thereafter, they demolished
the intervening boundary line and illegally took into

possession her shari share by merging the same into

Tofamuyes|

SB: Hon'ble Mr, Justice Ishtiag Ibrahim
Tajamul/PS*

-3-
their property. The occurrence was stated to have
been witnessed by the aforesaid witnesses
accompanying the complainant and her husband at

the relevant time.

3. The trial Court sought report of the
local police in the matter, on receipt of which formal
charge was framed against the appellants to which
they did not plead guilty. Prosecution produced six
witnesses in support of its case whereafter the
appellants were examined u/s 342, Cr.P.C but they
professed innocence though they neither recorded
their statements on oath nor opted to produce any
witness in their defence. On conclusion of trial, the
learned trial Court acquitted the appellants through
the impugned judgment, however, directed that
possession of the land be restored to complainant.

Hence, this appeal.

4. Arguments heard and record of the case
was perused.
5. The learned trial Court has observed in

the impugned judgment that:

“... Therefore, the property to the extent of
shari share of complainant, shall be restored
to the complainant in terms of section 8 of the
Illegal Dispossession Act, 2005, through
Tehsildar, Girdawar _ Circle, Patwari
concerned alongwith SHO P.S Kalakot. In
case of any hurdle, ‘resistance either by

$8: Hon'ble Mr, Justice Ishtiag Ibrahim
-4-

accused or any other person on their behalf,
the officer-in-charge (SHO) of the police
Station Kalakot is directed to provide
assistance as necessary for restoration of the
possession of the property to complainant.
Counsel of the complainant stated at the bar
during arguments that if possession of the
disputed property was restored to the
complainant then complainant has no
objection on the acquittal of accused because
of relationship as sister and brothers inter se.
Therefore the accused are acquitted of the
charge leveled against them.....”

The learned trial Court has passed the
order for restoration of possession of the land to
complainant in terms of section 8 of the Act,
therefore, it would be appropriate to reproduce the

said section for ready reference.

8. Delivery of possession of property to
owner etc. (1) On conclusion of trial, if the
Court finds that an owner or occupier of the
property was illegally dispossessed or property
was grabbed in contravention of Section 3, the
Court may, at the time of passing order under
sub-section (2) and (3) of that section, direct
the accused or any person claiming through
him for restoration of the possession of the
property to the owner or, as the case may be,
the occupier, if not already restored to him
under Section 7.

(2) For the purpose of sub-section (1), the
Court may, where it is required, direct the
officer-in-charge of the police station for such
assistance as may be required for restoration of
the possession of the property to the owner or,
as the case may be, the occupier.

Sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 3 of
the Act referred to in section 8(1) above reads as

under:

(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of the
subsection (1) shall, without prejudice to any
punishment to which he may be liable under

Tajamul/Ps* S.8: Hon'ble Mr. Justice Ishtiag [brahim
Tajamuyess|

-5-

any other law for the time being in force, be
punishable with imprisonment which may
extend to ten years and with fine and the
victim of the offence shall also be
compensated in accordance with the provision
of Section 544-A of the Code.

(3) Whoever forcibly and wrongfully
dispossesses any owner or occupier of any
property and his act does not fall within sub-
section (1), shall be punished with
imprisonment which may extend to three years
or with fine or with both, in addition to any
other punishment to which he may be liable
under any other law for the time being in
force. The person dispossessed shall also be
compensated in accordance with provisions of
section 544-A of the Code.

6. It is manifest from section 8 read with
sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 3 of the Act that
the Court in case of conviction of the accused can
pass the order for restoration of the property but in
the present case the learned trial Court, after
recording evidence in the case, has acquitted the
accused on one hand and on the other hand has
ordered for restoration of possession of the land to
complainant. In other words, conviction is sine qua
non for handing over the possession u/s 8 of the ibid
Act. Thus, findings of the learned trial Court are not
in consonance with the above referred provisions of
the Act as well as section 367, Cr.P.C requiring the
Court to give specific findings for determination of a
criminal controversy. So, the judgment of the
learned trial Court, being illegal, is liable to be set

aside.

5.8: rbt rats
Court.

-6-
7. When the learned counsel for the
appellants, the learned A.A.G. and the learned
Amicus Curie were confronted with the situation,
they all agreed that remand of the case to trial Court
has become imperative in the circumstances.
Resultantly, this appeal is allowed, the impugned
Judgment is set aside and the case is remanded to
learned trial Court with directions to hear the parties
and thereafter pass an appropriate judgment strictly
in accordance with law, without being influenced
from its earlier order or by this order. The parties are
directed to appear before the trial Court. on
21.09.2020 and thereafter the learned trial Court
shall do the needful within one month positively.

Office shall send record of the case forthwith to trial

Announced.
Dt: 10.09.2020

S.8: ‘bi tee ishel: tim

