JUDGMENT SHEET
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT
PESHAWAR
(Judicial Department)

Cr.A.No.103-A of 2012 with Murder
Reference No.5-A/2012.

Date of hearing: 05.12.2019.
M/s Astaghfirullah, Syed Abdul Fayaz and
Jalal-ud-Din Akbar Azam Khan Gara,

advocates for the appellant.

Mr.Muhammad Shabbir, advocate for the
complainant.

Ms.Sofia Noreen, AAG for the State.

JUDGMENT

LAL JAN KHATTAK, J.- Through this
judgment, we shall also decide Cr.A.No.
163-A of 2019 titled “Amir Afzal Vs. The
State” as both the appeals have arisen from
same FIR bearing No.160 dated 01.05.2010
under sections 302/324/34 PPC of Police
Station Kalabat Town Ship Haripur, whereby
appellants Muqaddar Shah and Amir Afzal
have been convicted under section 302 (b)
PPC and sentenced to death on three
counts with payment of fine of Rs.2,00,000/-
on three counts or in default whereof to
suffer imprisonment for six months on each
count vide separate judgments dated
08.08.2012 and 23.05.2019 of the learned

Additional Sessions Judge-ll, Haripur and
Judge, Criminal Model Court, Haripur,
respectively. The convicts have filed their
appeals whereas the learned trial court has
sent murder references for confirmation or
otherwise of the death sentences. We
propose to decide the appeals and the

references through this single judgment.

2. Brief facts of the case are that on
01.05.2010, Sajjad Ahmad (PW-11) reported
to ASI Riasat Khan (PW-9) in the
emergency ward of DHQ Hospital Haripur to
the effect that on the day of occurrence at
about 09.30 hours’ he, his _ father
Safdar Zaman, brothers Akhtar Zaman,
Mukhtiar Ahmad alias Tahir and Shafique
were unloading wheat bags from the trolley,
in front of their house, when in the meantime
appellants Amir Afzal and his nephew
Mugadar Shah came there duly armed with
klashnikoves and started altercation with his
father on which they all entreated them for
forgiveness but they did not accept the
request and with their weapons opened
firing at them. According to the FIR (Ex.PA),
with the fire shots of Amir Afzal, father of the

complainant, namely, Safdar Zaman and
brother Mukhtiar Ahmad were hit whereas
with the fire shot of Muqadar Shah brother of
the complainant, namely, Akhtar Zaman was
hit. It is also in the FIR that with the fire
shots of the appellants one Sher Bahadar, a
nearby shopkeeper, too was hit. All the
injured were shifted to the hospital for their
treatment but father of the complainant and
his two brothers succumbed to their injuries
and breathed their last on the way to

hospital.

3. Initially, appellant Muqadar Shah was
arrested, who was put to face the trial and
ultimately was convicted and sentenced vide
judgment dated 08.08.2018 as mentioned
above, who then assailed his conviction and
sentence through his appeal bearing
No.103-A of 2012. During pendency of his
appeal, co-accused Amir Afzal was arrested
and criminal appeal of Mugadar Shah was
adjourned sine die and the case record was
sent to the learned trial court for conclusion
of trial of co-accused Amir Afzal, which trial
was concluded and he too was convicted
and sentenced through judgment

dated 25.05.2019 as mentioned above.
4. Arguments heard and record gone
through.
5. In order to prove its case, prosecution

examined 14/15 witnesses. Eye version
account of the case has been furnished by
complainant Sajjad Ahmad, who appeared
as PW-11 and also by Shafique, who
testified as PW-12. No doubt, both the
eyewitnesses are closely related to the
victims but it has been held umpteenth times
by the superior courts that evidence of a
closely related eyewitness cannot be
discarded on the sole ground of his being a
close relative of the victim if otherwise the
evidence so furnished rings true and is
corroborated by circumstantial evidence of
the case. In the context of the above, we
appreciate the evidence furnished by PW-11

and 12.

6. While appearing as PW-11,
complainant of the case deposed that on the
day of occurrence, he, his father and three
brothers were unloading wheat from a trolley
in front of their house, which was brought

from the threshing floor in gunny bags and in
the meanwhile, both the appellants came
there duly armed with klashnikoves and after
some altercation they started firing at them
with which his father Safdar Zaman and two
brothers, namely, Mukhtiar Ahmad and
Akhtar Zaman were hit while they escaped
unhurt. Besides, in the FIR description of
weapons of the offence has also been given
by the complainant coupled with assigning
separate role of firing to each of the
appellants viz-a-viz their targets. No doubt,
the defence through cross-examination has
tried to exclude presence of PW-11 on the
spot at the time of occurrence for his being
at Islamabad but the suggestions qua non-
presence of the complainant on the spot at
the relevant time do not hold any water as
the occurrence took place at 9.30 am and
was reported in the hospital at 10.15 am, i.e.
within a period of 45 minutes, which prompt
lodging of the FIR by PW-11 was not
possible had he not been present on the
spot at the time of occurrence. Besides,
within a period of less than an hour, a
person cannot reach Haripur from
Islamabad. Moreso, it reflects from the

record that on the day of occurrence, PW-11
was present in his village as he was on

leave from his unit.

7. In addition, PW-12, Shafique Ahmad
too has testified by deposing that he, his
father and brothers were busy in the process
of unloading the wheat bags from the trolley,
which was parked in front of their house
when both the appellants came there duly
armed with their klashnikoves and
unleashed firing at them with which his
father and two brothers were hit, who
breathed their last while being taken to the
hospital. The ocular account furnished by
the eyewitnesses has been corroborated by
medical examinations of the three deceased
and also supported by the site plan Ex.PB,
wherefrom the Investigating Officer has
recovered five empties of 7.62 bore. Also
from the site plan the Investigating Officer
took into possession bloodstained earth

from the places of all the three victims.

8. Another pronounced aspect of the
case is that the occurrence had taken place
in front of the house of the eyewitnesses,
who were residing therein with the victims

jointy and at the relevant time were
unloading the wheat from the _ trolley,
therefore, their presence on the spot was

quite natural.

9. Furthermore, as there is no blood
feud of the eyewitnesses with the
appellants, therefore, there does not arise
any question for their false implication. It is
well settled that substitution of an actual
culprit for an innocent person is a rare
phenomena because no prudent person
would ever let the actual wrongdoer scot-
free and replace him for the one, who had

no nexus with the crime.

10. Learned counsel for the appellants
also contended with vehemence that
escaping unhurt of both the eyewitnesses is
reflective of the fact that they were not
present on the spot at the time of
occurrence and that they were planted as
prosecution witnesses subsequently in order
to put life in the prosecution case. Ibid
submission of the learned defence counsel
too is of no help to the appellants as firing at
a particular person is choice of the targettor.
It is up to the firer either to fire at one or two

targets to quench his thirst. So receiving no
injury by the eyewitnesses does not mean
that they were not present on the spot at the
time of occurrence. Be that as it may, it is on
record that when the firing started, the
eyewitnesses took refuge behind the trolley,
wherefrom the wheat was being unloaded
by the complainant side at the time of

occurrence.

11. | Thorough and careful examination of
the case record would show that the
prosecution has proved its case against both
the appellants through worth reliable and
trustworthy evidence. Involvement of the
appellants has been proved beyond any
shadow of doubt. The learned trial court has
appreciated the prosecution evidence in its
true perspective and correctly convicted the
appellants to which no exception could be
taken by this court. However, regarding the
sentence awarded to the appellants, we are
not in agreement with the learned trial court
as there is no material on the record to show
that what had happened on the spot before
the occurrence. It reflects from the record
that prior to the occurrence there had been

altercation between the appellants and the
victims and it is not known that what
prompted the appellants to unleash the
indiscriminate firing. Whether the victims’
side was responsible for aggravating the
situation or the appellants did so, which
aspect of the case can be taken and
considered as a mitigating circumstance
necessitating reduction in the sentences
awarded to the appellants. Besides, the
appellants on their just arrival to the spot did
not open firing at the victims and, as per
record, they first talked to the opposite side
and when it did not yield any result, then
they took the law into their hands. In such
like circumstances, the case set up against
the appellants could not be termed as rare
of the rarest cases wherein death sentence

is to be awarded.

12. For what has been discussed above,
we partially allow this and the connected
appeal, maintain conviction of the appellants
on three counts but reduce their sentence
from death to imprisonment for life on three
counts with benefit under section 382-B
Cr.P.C. We also reduce the amount of

compensation from  Rs.2,00,000/- to
10

Rs.1,00,000/- each on three counts payable
to legal heirs of the deceased or in default
whereof the appellants shall further suffer

simple imprisonment of six months.

13. |The murder references are answered

in negative.
JUDGE
JUDGE
Announced.
05.12.2019.

Sadiq Shah PS (DB) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Lal Jan Khattak & Hon'ble Mr. Justice
Abdul Shakoor.
