JUDGMENT SHEET

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
D.IL. KHAN BENCH

(Judicial Department)
Cr.A. No.55-D/2017.
State through Advocate General
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Peshawar
Vs
Sajid Munir
JUDGMENT

For Appellant: Mr. Rehmatullah, Asstt: A.G.

For Respondent: Mr. Saif ur Rehman Khan, Advocate.

Date of hearing: 27.6.2022

HAI
MUHAMMAD FAHEEM WALL J- This appeal calls in
question the judgment dated 25.5.2017, rendered by the learned
Additional Sessions Judge-VI, D.I.Khan, whereby the respondent
has been acquitted of the charges in case FIR No.115 dated
17.3.2014, under Sections 302, 324, 337(iii) PPC of Police

Station City, D.L.Khan.

2. The prosecution story as disclosed in the FIR Ex: PA,
registered on the basis of murasila, in brief, is that on 17.3.2014 at
about 19:40 hours, complainant Muhammad Kamran (PW-7), while
accompanying his injured mother Mst. Nahid Akhtar, aged about
50/55 years alongwith his nephew Muhammad Hassan, aged about

3/4 years and his son Muhammad Rizwan, reported the matter to
-2-
Rustam Khan S.I. at emergency room of civil hospital, D.I-Khan, to
the effect that he alongwith his mother took Muhammad Hassan to
Dr. Salim and were returning in a Qingqi rickshaw driven by him;
that he stopped his rickshaw and went to purchase bread/Roti from a
Tandoor alongside Green Marriage Hall; that it was about 7:30
hours (evening) that his uncle i.e. the accused/respondent, armed
with pistol came there and started firing at his mother and nephew
Muhammad Hassan, as a result whereof, they both sustained
injuries. The occurrence was stated to be witnessed by his uncle
Muhammad Azam (PW-8) and other people present on the spot.
Motive for the offence was stated to be a domestic dispute. He
charged the accused for the commission of offence. Subsequently,

mother of the complainant died in the hospital.

3. On completion of the investigation, complete
challan was submitted against the accused to the learned trial
Court, where at the commencement of the trial the prosecution
produced and examined as many as twelve witnesses, whereafter,
accused was examined under section 342, Cr.P.C., wherein he
denied the allegations and professed innocence, however, neither
he opted to be examined on oath in terms of Section 342, Cr.P.C.
nor produced defence evidence. After conclusion of the trial,
learned trial Court vide judgment impugned herein acquitted the

accused, hence the instant criminal appeal.
-3-

4. We have heard the learned Assistant Advocate
General and the learned counsel for the respondent, and scanned

the record with their valuable assistance.

5. Although the accused/respondent earned acquittal
after a full-dressed trial, however, this being the Court of appeal is
under its legal obligation to re-assess the already assessed
evidence in order to arrive at a just conclusion. The matter was
reported at emergency room of civil hospital by the complainant
(PW-7), who while reporting the matter stated that he alongwith
his mother took Muhammad Hassan to Dr. Salim and after taking
medicine they were retuming in a Qinggi rickshaw driven by him,
he stopped his rickshaw and went to purchase bread/Roti from a
Tandoor alongside Green Marriage Hall, it was about 7:30 hours
(evening) when the accused/respondent, armed with pistol came
there and started firing at his mother and nephew Muhammad
Hassan, as a result whereof, they both sustained injuries and
subsequently his mother succumbed to her injuries in the hospital. In
the report, he introduced his uncle Muhammad Azam (PW-8) to be
the eyewitness of the occurrence. So, this case mainly hinges on the
testimony of complainant and his uncle Muhammad Azam and this
Court is to scrutinize their testimony in order to see as to whether the
occurrence took place in the mode, manner and at the stated time

and as to whether both the witnesses were present on the spot at the
-4-
time of occurrence. The examination-in-chief of the complainant if
placed in juxtaposition with the contents of FIR, same belies the FIR
regarding mode and manner of the occurrence inasmuch as, same
depicts that dishonest improvement has been made by the
complainant with regard to number of fire shots, which fact was
never mentioned in the FIR. It is also surprising when he stated that
he took both the injured to emergency of DHQ hospital D.I.Khan
and after a while the doctor came out and told him that his mother
had died and that it was about 7/7:30 PM, whereas the time of
occurrence is also 7:30 PM, while the matter was reported at 7:40
PM. It is also surprising when the complainant in the same breath
stated that “after that my elder brother brought my nephew to DHQ
Hospital D.I.Khan who was also injured with firearm”. From this
narration, it can safely be concluded that the complainant was not
present on the spot at the time of occurrence. The matter does not
end here, as the complainant further stated in his examination-in-
chief that on the next day police took them to the spot, which is
negated by the statement of the Investigating Officer as well as the
recovery memo prepared on 17.3.2014, so much so the Investigating
Officer stated to have visited the spot on said date at 9:00 PM.
While going through cross-examination, we found the same as

shaky and not worth reliance. In case _ titled
-5-

“Muhammad Mansha Vs. The State” (2018 SCMR 772), it was

held by the Honourable Supreme Court of Pakistan that:-

"Once the Court comes to the conclusion that

the eye-witnesses had made dishonest

improvements in their statements then it is

not safe to place reliance on their statement.

It is also settled by this Court that whenever a

witness made dishonest improvement in his

version in order to bring his case in line with

the medical evidence or in order to strengthen

the prosecution case then his testimony is not

worthy of credence."
6. The second alleged eyewitness Muhammad Azam
was examined as PW-8, who stated that “they were coming back
from doctor, stopped near Marriage Hall to purchase Roti; that
suddenly the accused made firing and then he killed”. During his
statement it was observed that the witness was not deposing in a
coherent way and seemed quite oblivion and disoriented and that
he was speaking in general and quite inadequately. This statement
by itself is not sufficient to be relied upon for sustaining
conviction, that too, on a capital charge, as it clearly depicts that
he was not present on the spot at the time of occurrence. Had he
been present on the spot, the complainant while reporting the
matter must have mentioned his company while taking his
nephew to the doctor, rather his name was mentioned at the end of

story to have witnessed the occurrence. His presence is nowhere

established from any independent evidence. Needless to mention
-6-
that as earlier stated, the complainant stated in his examination-in-
chief, that “After that my elder brother brought my nephew to
DHQ Hospital D.I.Khan who was also injured with firearm”. It is
pertinent to mention here that Bashir Ahmad, father of the
complainant and husband of the deceased was examined before
the Court as PW-2, who is also identifier of the dead body. He
contradicted both the complainant and alleged eyewitness by
stating in his cross examination that at the time of occurrence he
was present in his house situated at a distance of about 200 yards;
that report was made in his presence; that he proceeded to the
hospital from his house when he got information regarding the
occurrence. Surprisingly, he stated that when he was at home, his
brother brought the minor injured and then he took him to the
hospital, that his brother did not accompany him to the hospital
rather Muhammad Rizwan and he took the minor to the hospital
on a motorcycle and they reached the hospital at 8:00 PM; that
when he reached to the hospital, he found his sons Kamran and
Adnan alongwith the dead body of his wife. He admitted that he
had not signed the report lodged by his son. He also admitted that

he was not eyewitness of the occurrence.

7. Dr. Farhat Jabeen SMO conducted autopsy on the
dead body of deceased on 17.3.2014 at about 9:15 hours. During

examination of the dead body she observed entry wound over left
-7-
angle 4” length of mandible below 4” breadth left ear (went
through/through till exit No.1), an entry wound over scalp left
side temporal area 4” length & %” width, exit No.1 over right
cheek %” length and %” width, exit No.2 bleeding and entry
continued. She also observed that scalp, skull, brain and
membrane were injured. She mentioned probable time between
injury and death to be 1/2 to 1 hour, time between death and
postmortem as 1 to 1/2 hours. During cross examination, she
stated that the names of identifiers on postmortem report are not
in her handwriting and she did not know who had written those
names. She stated that they do not write names in the column
meant for identification of the dead body, rather same are to be
written by identifier of the dead body himself. Similarly, Dr.
Ghulam Muhammad SMO was examined as PW-9, who
examined injured Muhammad Hassan on 173.2014 at 7:45 PM,
who observed firearm entry wound at the poster lateral aspect of
right mid chest and one bullet recovered from the patient’s chest
by a surgeon which was handed over to police. It is pertinent to
mention that the matter was reported at about 19:40 hours,
whereas the injured was examined at 7:45 PM. The time of
examination of the injured by the doctor suggests that the
witnesses were telling a lie regarding shifting the injured from the

spot to his house and subsequently to the hospital.
-8-
8. It is fundamental principle of jurisprudence, that is,
to disbelieve a witness, it is not necessary that there should be
numerous infirmities. If there is one which impeaches the
credibility of the witness, that may make the entire statement
doubtful. It has been now settled that conviction must be based on
unimpeachable evidence and certainty of guilt and any doubt
arising in the prosecution case must be resolved in favour of the
accused. Reliance in this regard is placed on case Muhammad

Khan and another Vs. The State, 1999 SCMR 1220. In the case

reported as Irfan Ali Vs. The State (2015 SCMR 840), it was

observed that:-

“To award a capital punishment in a
murder crime, it was imperative for the
prosecution to lead unimpeachable
evidence of a first degree, which
ordinarily must get strong corroboration
from other independent evidence if the
witnesses were interested or inimical
towards the accused”.
9. The Investigating Officer namely Faqir Muhammad
Ameer was examined as PW-12, who stated to have prepared the
site plan on the pointation of complainant, collected blood stained
earth from the place of the deceased, two empties of .30 bore
pistol, took into possession veil and a led bullet sent by the

doctor, blood stained scarf belonging to the deceased, Qinggi, .30

bore pistol recovered from the accused alongwith three live
-9.
cartridges of same bore. He stated that the accused was arrested
from Nizam Gate barricade by police constables namely
Attaullah, Jan Bahadar and Farmanullah and was handed over to
him on the same day. After receipt of FSL report as well as Arms
Expert report, he annexed the same on file. During cross
examination, he admitted that he had not taken into possession the
registration book of the Qingqi rickshaw. It is an element of
surprise when he stated that the entire proceedings were
conducted in the light of torch. It is also astonishing that despite
availability of proprietor of Tandoor, namely Abdul Hameed,
neither he was cited as witness to the occurrence, nor he was
associated with the investigation. On the request of defence
counsel parcel No.3 was opened where it contained two empties
of .30 bore pistol, however, the witness admitted that he had not
mentioned the spare magazine in any recovery memo. He
admitted that he himself had not recovered any weapon or
ammunition from the accused, rather same were handed over to
him by one constable Atta Ullah No.7457. Astonishingly, said
Atta Ullah constable was not produced before the Court to
support the Investigating Officer, rather he was abandoned by the
prosecution. Even otherwise, arrest of the accused and recovery of
pistol from the accused has become doubtful in view of the

statement of Jan Bahadar constable, who was examined as PW-5.
-10-
He stated that he is marginal witness to the recovery memo vide
which the Investigating Officer during personal search of the
accused recovered and took into possession one pistol .30 bore i.e.
weapon of offence alongwith three rounds of the same bore. It is
also surprising when he stated during cross examination that
Investigating Officer of the instant case got arrested only accused
facing trial in his presence and no other proceeding was
conducted by him in his presence either on the spot or in the
police station. In this view of the matter, such recoveries have lost
their evidentiary value, which could not be relied upon for safe
dispensation of justice. Moreso, according to this witness the case
property was sent to FSL by Moharrir concerned, however,
statement of Moharrir was not recorded by him. It is pertinent to
mention here that the crime empties were allegedly effected from
the spot on 17.3.2014 and as per prosecution version, the accused
was arrested with .30 bore pistol on said date, however, the crime
empties alongwith .30 bore pistol were sent to the FSL on
20.3.2014. It is not established on the record that where remained
the aforesaid articles during the intervening period till those were
sent to the FSL. Neither Moharrir nor the official who allegedly
took the said articles to the FSL were examined to ascertain the
safe custody of same till their dispatch to the FSL. Even

otherwise, it is now well settled that such type of evidence
-ll-
(recoveries) is a corroborative piece of evidence and where direct
evidence fails, corroborative piece of evidence is of no avail.

Reliance placed on the case reported as Dr. Israr-ul-Hagq Vs.

Muhammad Fayyaz__and another (2007__SCMR_1427,

Muhammad Jamil Vs. Muhammad Akram _and_others (2009
SCMR 120), Abid Ali and 2 others Vs. The State (2011 SCMR
208), Muhammad Nawaz and others Vs. The State_and others

2016 SCMR 267) and Tarig Zaman Vs. Muhammad_Shafi

Khan and 2 others (2018 MLD Peshawar 854).

10. The prosecution alleged motive to be a domestic
dispute, however, no reliable evidence was led in this respect to
establish the motive. Although, it is well settled principle of law
that prosecution is not bound to setup a motive in every case but
once it is alleged, it become duty of prosecution to prove the same

and otherwise to suffer consequences thereof. In case titled

"Muhammad Ashraf alias Acchu Vs. The State" (2019 SCMR

652), it was held that:

"7. The motive is always a double-edged
weapon. The complainant Sultan Ahmad
(PW9) has admitted murder enmity
between the parties and has also given
details of the same in his statement
recorded before the trial court. No doubt,
previous enmity can be a reason for the

appellant to commit the alleged crime, but
-12-

it can equally be a reason for the
complainant side to falsely implicate the
appellant in this case for previous

grouse."
In case titled “Irfan Ali Vs. The State” (2015

SCMR 840), it was held that:-

“To award a capital punishment in a
murder crime, it is imperative for the
prosecution to lead unimpeachable
evidence of a first degree, which ordinarily
must get strong corroboration from other
independent evidence if the witnesses are
interested or inimical towards the accused.
In a criminal trial no presumption can be
drawn against the accused person as it is a
cardinal principle of justice that no one
should be construed into a crime without
legal proof/evidence, sufficient to be acted
upon. No care and caution was observed
in the present case in light of this
principle. No evidence of believable nature
was led with regard to the motive in the
case to lend support to the prosecution

version”.
11. The learned trial Court after proper reappraisal of
evidence available on record, has rendered findings of acquittal in
favour of respondents. In the cases titled “Raja Khurram Ali
Khan and 2 others Vs. Tayyaba Bibi_and another” (PLD 2020
Supreme Court 146) the august Supreme Court was pleased to

hold:-
-13-

“Double presumption of innocence---
Interference---Scope---In appeals against
acquittal, the accused had a double
presumption of innocence; the first when
he was charged and tried and, the second
arising on his acquittal---Dislodging such
double presumption should be sparingly
exercised by the Appellate Court, and that
too, if the conclusion drawn was not based
on fair reading of evidence, perverse,
arbitrary or wholly unreasonable---
Interference by the appellate Court in an
acquittal order of the Trial Court merely
for the reason that another view of the
evidence was possible, would not be legally
correct---However, if the very principle of
appreciation of evidence was erred, and
had caused failure of justice, then the
order of acquittal would warrant to be set

aside.”

12. In view of the above, this Court reaches to an
inescapable conclusion that the prosecution has miserably failed
to prove its case against accused/respondent. This is one of the
celebrated principles of criminal jurisprudence that accused is the
favourite child of law and he has a presumption of innocence in
his favour and every benefit of doubt goes to him regardless of
fact whether he has taken any such plea or not. Reliance may be
placed on the case titled "Faryad Ali Vs. The State" (2008
SCMR_1086) and “Sher Zad Khan _and_ another Vs. Mst.
Zulekha and another” (2016 P. CrLJ. 541 Peshawar).
Hie
3eob

-14-
13. The learned trial Court has correctly appreciated the
evidence available on the file and the impugned judgment being
well reasoned does not suffer from any infirmity which could call
for interference. Accordingly, this criminal appeal being bereft of

merits is dismissed.

Announced.

Dt: 27.6.2022. 2

*Kifayat/PS* ~
JUDGE

Wf

Va

JUDGE

(D.B)
Hon’ ble Mr. Justice Ijaz Anwar
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Faheem Wali
