JUDGMENT SHEET
PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, PESHAWAR
(Judicial Department)

J Cr. A No. 215-P/2023

Abdullah
Vs
The State

JUDGMENT

Date of hearing: 26.06.2024

Appellant by: Mr. Shabbir Hussain
Gigyani, Advocate.

The__ State by: Mr._Nouman-ul-Haq
Kakakhel, AAG

Complainant by: Syed Mubashir Shah &
Mr. Saddam Hussain, Advocates.

wee
SAHIBZADA_ ASADULLAH, J.- Through this
single judgment, this court shall also decide the
connected Cr.R No. 38-P/2023 titled “Raheem
Khan vs Abdullah etc” as both the matters
are arising out of one and the same judgment
dated 26.01.2023 passed by the learned
Additional Sessions Judge-l, Swabi delivered in
case FIR No.1125 dated 28.10.2017 under
sections 302 PPC at police station Swabi,
whereby the appellant Abdullah son of Ismail
was convicted and sentenced as under:

Under section .302(b) PPC to
imprisonment for life as Tazir
and to pay a fine of
Rs.10,00,000/- (ten lacs) to be
paid to the legal heirs of the
deceased Haider Khan within
the meaning of section 544-A
CrPC to be recoverable as
arrears of land revenue and in
default of payment, he shall
further suffer six months
simple imprisonment. Benefit
of section 382-B Cr.PC was
extended in favor of the
appellant.

2. Facts forming the background of
the instant case are that on 28.10.2017
complainant Raheem Khan son of Zareef Khan
reported the matter in the causality DHQ
Hospital Swabi to the effect that he alongwith
his son Haider Khan, after performing Zuhar
prayer, were coming from the Mosque Khaista
Khan; that his son was ahead of him to their
house when in the meanwhile, Abdullah son of
Ismail, duly armed with deadly weapon
suddenly appeared and started firing at his son
Haider Khan as a result of which, his son was
hit and died on the spot. After the occurrence,
the accused decamped from the spot. The
occurrence was stated to be witnessed by

Mursaleen son of Salat Khan (grandson of
complainant) alongwith other persons present
there. Motive behind the occurrence is that the
daughter of the deceased was married to
accused and the accused divorced
Mst.Sheema some 7/8 months ago and a
dispute over womenfolk was existed. He
charged the appellant for the commission of
offence hence, the present FIR.

3. After completion of investigation,
complete challan was put in court. Provisions
of section 265-C CrPC were complied with and,
the appellant was charge sheeted, to which he
pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. In order to
prove its claim, the prosecution produced and
examined as many as 08 witnesses. After
closure of prosecution evidence, statement of
appellant was recorded under section 342
CrPC, wherein he posed innocence, however,
neither he wished to be examined on Oath as
required under section 340 (2) Cr.PC, nor
wanted to produce evidence in defence. The
learned trial Court, after full-fledged trial
convicted and sentenced the appellant, fully
detailed in the earlier part of this judgment,

hence, this appeal.
4, Arguments of learned counsel for
the parties and learned AAG representing the
State were heard and record scanned through
with their valuable assistance.

5. The tragic incident claimed life of
the deceased. The dead body was shifted to
the hospital and the matter was reported. The
injury sheet and inquest report were prepared,
the dead body was sent for postmortem
examination. The Investigating Officer after
receiving copy of the FIR visited the spot and
on pointation of the witnesses, prepared the
site plan. During spot inspection blood-stained
earth was collected from the place of the
deceased and 06 empties of .30 bore from the
place of the accused. The collected empties
were sent to the firearms expert and a report
was received telling that the same were fired
from one and the same weapon. Soon after the
incident, the accused went into hiding till his
arrest. The appellant faced the trial and on
conclusion of the trial the learned trial court
was pleased to hold him responsible for the
murder of the deceased.

6. The learned trial court appreciated

the evidence on file and it was after applying of
its judicial mind to the evidence collected by
the prosecution that the learned trial court
came to the conclusion that it was the appellant
who killed the deceased. True that single
accused is charged and equally true that in
case of single accused substitution is a rare
phenomenon. But the charge against single
accused by itself is not the determining factor,
rather under all circumstances, the prosecution
is bound to prove its case, that too, by
producing trust worthy and confidence inspiring
witnesses. In order to appreciate the approach
of the learned trial court we deem it essential to
revisit the record of the case and to reconsider
the statements of the witnesses so that
miscarriage of justice could be avoided.

7. The points for determination
before this court are as to whether the incident
occurred in the mode, manner and at the
stated time; as to whether the witnesses were
present on the spot at the time of incident and
in the hospital at the time of report; as to
whether the medical evidence supports the
case of the prosecution; as to whether the
prosecution succeeded in proving the alleged

motive and as to whether the prosecution
succeeded in bringing home guilt against the
appellant.

8. The deceased after receiving
firearm injuries died on the spot and for his
murder single accused is charged that too by
the father of the deceased and by an eye
witness claimed to have seen the occurrence.
This court is to see as to whether the
prosecution succeeded in bringing home guilt
against the appellant and that it was the
appellant who killed the deceased. In order to
appreciate the circumstances of the present
case, we deem it essential to go through the
statements of the witnesses. The complainant
was examined as PW-3 whereas, the eye
witness as PW-4. The complainant disclosed
that on the day of incident while coming back
from the mosque, the appellant fired at the
deceased, and after receiving firearm injuries,
the deceased died on the spot; that the dead
body was hurriedly shifted to the hospital,
where he reported the matter. The eye witness
supported the report of the complainant and he
also explained the circumstances in which the
incident occurred and the dead body was

shifted to the hospital. The witnesses were put
to lengthy cross examination with the strongest
desire to extract something favourable to the
appellant. Admittedly, the incident occurred in
the village of the complainant, that too, when
the deceased performed his Zuhar prayer. As
the incident occurred at 13:30 hours so the
stance of the complainant gets support
regarding his prayer in the mosque. The site
plan depicts that the mosque is situated
adjacent to the place of incident and that by the
time the deceased had already come out from
the mosque followed by the complainant and
the eye witness. As the complainant was a
farmer by profession, so his presence in the
village at the stated time is not only convincing,
but also appeal to the prudent mind of this
court. Keeping in view the age of the
complainant, it can be expected from a person
of the age to perform prayer in congregation,
and keeping in view the time of incident we
cannot take another view, but the one that after
doing his work in the field, the complainant
returned home to take meal and to perform his
prayer. An attempt was made to convince that
had he been a farmer by profession, then

under all circumstances he would be present in
the fields instead, in the village and that in
routine all the farmers come home in the
evening. We are not persuaded with this limb
of the argument, as it depends upon the nature
of work, the kind of fields and the distance of
the fields from the village which would
determine the availability or otherwise of the
complainant in the village. As admittedly, no
specific question was asked from the
complainant regarding the distance of field
from the village, regarding the nature of his
work and regarding the crops he sown, so this
court is confident in holding that the availability
of the complainant at the stated time is
convincing and it appeals to the judicial mind of
this court. The defence also questioned the
presence of the eye witness at the time of
incident, but when the eye witness was
examined as PW-4, he explained his presence
on the spot and in the mosque on the day of
incident. True that during the days of incident,
the eye witness was a student, but equally true
that nothing was brought on record that at the
stated time he was present in the school and
even the investigating officer could not collect

any document in that respect. An attempt was
made to convince the absence of eye witness
from the spot at the stated time, so the
attention of this court was invited towards the
report of the complainant and towards the fact
that while reporting the matter, the complainant
did not disclose that the eye witness also
performed his prayer in the mosque alongwith
him. As the complainant is illiterate, so we
cannot expect minute details from him and
even the first information report is not an
encyclopedia which would contain the
complete details of the incident, rather its
purpose is only to bring the law enforcement
agency into motion and once the investigating
agency accepts the task then it is for it to
collect the evidence and to record statements
of all concerned. Even otherwise, while
reporting the matter the complainant has
mentioned the name of the eyewitness and
when the eyewitness was present at the stated
time, no other inference can be drawn but the
one that he was present with the complainant
in the mosque and after performing his prayer
he was also available in the street. Reliance in
this respect is placed on the judgment cited as

2021 SCMR 1428 titled “Abdul Latif vs Noor

10

Zaman and another” wherein, it has been

held as follow:

“No doubt, First Information
Report is not an encyclopedia of
prosecution's case, nonetheless,
it does contain certain details that
serves as Its mainstay in the
voyage; witnesses are the most
prominent part of those details as
their testimonies provide
evidentiary certainty regarding the
guilt of an offender.”
9. The dead body of the deceased
was hurriedly shifted to the hospital and the
matter was reported by the complainant. The
scribe was examined as PW-5 who disclosed
that on the day of incident he was performing
his duty in the Casualty of DHQ Hospital,
Swabi, on arrival of the dead body to the
hospital the complainant reported the matter
and he prepared the injury sheet and the
inquest report. The dead body was examined
by the doctor at 02:20 PM. The learned
counsel wanted to convince that the quick
succession of events by itself is a circumstance
which belies the stance of the complainant and

that neither the matter could be reported in the

shortest possible time, nor the post mortem
11

examination could be conducted. We are not
inclined to accept the submission of the
learned counsel on this particular aspect of the
case, as admittedly, the hospital was situated
at a short distance connected to the spot
through a metal road. Even the doctor
confirmed the time between injury and death as
immediate and the time between death and
post mortem about 40-minutes. The witnesses
were cross-examined regarding the shifting of
the dead body from the hospital, regarding the
kind of transport used and arranged for the
purpose. The witnesses explained that the
motorcar was the ownership of one Said
Qamar Khan. It was further explained by the
witnesses that they shifted the dead body of
the deceased with the help of PW Said Qamar
Khan in his motorcar. It is pertinent to mention
that the report was verified by the same very
person. The consistency between the
statements of the witnesses and the verification
of report by the owner of the vehicle by itseif is
sufficient to tell that the dead body was
promptly collected from the spot, hurriedly
shifted to the hospital and the matter was

reported with no loss of time. True that the
12

complainant in reply to a question responded
that they visited the police station but he did
not report the matter. The witness further
explained that he stopped in the police station
for few minutes and thereafter went to the
hospital. As on one hand, the complainant was
of extreme old age, whereas on the other being
illiterate he did not understand the nitty gritty of
the matter and he could not understand the
intention of the learned counsel, when such a
question was asked. There is no denial to this
fact that the matter was promptly reported, the
dead body was examined by the doctor soon
after the report was made and that the post
mortem examination was conducted within the
shortest possible time. The prompt report by
itself has excluded the possibility of
consultation and deliberation and we are not
inclined to hold that the matter was reported
after preliminary investigation. As is held in
case titled Ghafar Ali Vs The State and

another” (2021 SCMR 354), which reads as

follows: -

“The occurrence, according to
prosecution, took place at 4 pm,
injured and deceased were shifted
to the hospital where injured was
13

medically examined at 5.10 p.m.
The report was lodged to the
police in the hospital at 5.10 p.m.
and formal FIR was chalked out at
5.40 p.m. So within one hour and
ten minutes of the occurrence the
injured and the deceased were
shifted to the hospital and police
arrived there and matter was
reported by the complainant to
the police at 5.10 p.m. There was
hardly any time left in between for
consultation and deliberation.”

10. The investigating officer visited the
spot and on pointation of the witnesses
prepared the site plan. During spot inspection
blood was collected from the place of the
deceased and 6 empties of .30 bore near from
the place assigned to the appellant. The
investigating officer while preparing the site
plan has shown the mosque in which the
complainant and the eyewitness and the
deceased performed their prayer. True that the
investigating officer did not record the
statement of any other witness in that respect
and he did not record the statement of “Pesh-e-
Imam” of the mosque, but that is not the
determining factor, as people refrain to become

witnesses because of fear of enmity. The
14

presence of all concerned in the premises is
not beyond understanding. As the complainant
disclosed the distance between his house and
the mosque as 100 paces, so we are inclined
to hold that the mosque was the only mosque
which was situated near to the house of the
complainant and so the complainant along with
the eyewitness and deceased went to perform
their prayer. True that no other witness apart
from the complainant and the eyewitness came
to confirm the presence of the witnesses in the
mosque before the occurrence, but keeping in
view the time of incident, the profession of the
complainant and the age of the complainant
this court is confident in holding that his
presence in the mosque was natural and his
presence near the spot at the time of incident is
convincing. Both the witnesses were
questioned regarding this aspect of the case,
but we could not come across any substantial
contradiction and we despite efforts could not
lay hands on any evidence which would
contradict the stance of the witnesses. The
collection of blood and collection of empties
from the spot are the circumstances which lend

support to the statements of the witnesses and
15

which has strengthened the prosecution case
to a great extent. True that the witnesses are
closely related to the deceased, but equally
true that the defence could not bring on record
any evidence confirming their mala fide or their
interest to implicate falsely the appellant. Even
otherwise, it does not appeal to the judicial
mind of this court that a real father would
substitute an innocent person for the killer of
his son and under no circumstances would let
off the actual culprits. The mere relationship of
the witnesses would hardly be a circumstance
for holding thern unreliable and for excluding
their testimony of consideration. Once the
defence fails to allege mala fide to the
witnesses and once it comes on record that the
witnesses had no interest to falsely implicate,
then under all circumstances the statements of
the witnesses must be taken into consideration.
in the like circurnstances we are benefited from
the judgment of the apex court reported as
Muhammad Ijaz Vs. The State (2023 SCMR
1378), which reads as under: -
“There is no denial to this fact
that these PWs were related with

the deceased but the law in this
regard is well settled. A related
16

witness cannot be termed as an
interested witness under all
circumstances. A related witness
can also be a natural witness. If
an offence is committed within the
presence of the family members
then they assume the position of
natural witnesses. In case, their
evidence is reliable, cogent and
clear, the prosecution case
cannot be doubted. However, a
related witness would become an
interested witness when his
evidence is tainted with malice
and it shows that he is desirous of
implicating the accused by
fabricating and concocting
evidence but the learned counsel
for the petitioner could not show
us anything in this regard.”

11. The appellant is singularly charged
and the inter-se relationship between the
appellant and the deceased cannot be ignored.
The record tells that the daughter of the
deceased was married to the appellant. The
relationship between the spouses became
strained and ultimately it led to the divorce. The
relationship between the parties is established
on record and even the marriage between the
appellant and Mst. Sheema has also been

admitted by all related. The unfortunate
17

deceased was working in UAE and it was few
months back that he returned to his home. It is
pertinent to mention that the marriage between
the parties stood dissolved some 7/8 months
before the incident and the unfortunate
deceased lost his life because of the same. It
was submitted that in case of divorce it was the
deceased to retaliate and not the appellant, but
we cannot ignore that it was the divorce which
urged the appellant to retaliate and that it was
the deceased who was suspected for bringing
the spouses to the point of no return. As
admittedly, before the divorce the parties had
no ill-will and no serious incidents took place
between the parties, which can be assessed as
the cause of killing. As the witnesses remained
consistent, as the accused is singularly
charged, so the consistency between the
witnesses and the strained relationship
between the parties, are the circumstances
which must be taken into consideration. Even
otherwise, in case of single accused
substitution is the rarest phenomenon.
Reliance can be placed on the judgment of
august Supreme Court of Pakistan titled

“Imran Mehmood Versus the State and
18

another” (2023 SCMR 795), which reads as
follows: -

“Learned counsel for the

appellant could not point out any

reason as to why the complainant

has falsely involved the appellant

In the present case and let off the

real culprit, who has brutally

murdered her father and uncle.

Substitution in such like cases Is

a rare phenomenon.”
12. The medical evidence supports
the case of the prosecution. The doctor
explained that the deceased received three
firearm entry wounds and he also disclosed the
time between injury and death ie.
instantaneous and time between death and
postmortem about 40 minutes. The medical
evidence is in line with the ocular account and
we, despite efforts, could not come across any
substantial conflict between the two. The
harmony between the medical evidence and
ocular account has further substantiated the
claim of the complainant and, the same has
strengthened the case of the prosecution. We

are benefited from the judgment reported as

(2022 YLR 324) titled “Sharfuddin alias
19

Sharfu and another Vs. The State” it is held
that: -
“The medical evidence fully
supports the ocular account so
far the injuries received by the
deceased, time which lapse

between the injury and death and
between death and postmortem.”

13. The Investigating Officer collected
06 empties of .30 bore from the place of
accused, the same were sent to the firearms
expert to ascertain that from how many
weapons the same were fired. A report was
received telling that the same were fired from
one and the same .30 bore pistol. True that the
laboratory report is supportive in nature and, it
alone cannot be pressed into service for
convicting an accused, but once the ocular
account inspires confidence, then this piece of
evidence can be taken into consideration and it
by itself would lend support to the prosecution
case and to the statements of the witnesses.

414. The motive was alleged that the
daughter of the deceased was married to the
appellant and that the relationship between the
spouses became strained and ultimately it led

to the divorce some 7/8 months prior to the
20

incident. The relationship between the parties
is established on record and even the marriage
between the appellant and Mst. Sheema has
also been admitted by all related. A question
was put to the appellant while recording his
statement under section 342 CrPC regarding
the divorce of the deceased, he admitted that
he had divorced Mst. Sheema, who was the
daughter of the deceased. It was submitted
that in case of divorce it was the deceased to
retaliate and not the appellant, but we cannot
ignore that it was the divorce which urged the
appellant to retaliate and that it was the
deceased who was suspected for bringing the
spouses to the point of no return. As
admittedly, before the divorce the parties had
no ill-will and no serious incidents took place
between the parties, which can be assessed as
the cause of killing.

15. The record tells that the appellant
remained absconder for considerable long time
as the occurrence took place on 28.10.2017
and the accused was arrested on 20.08.2020,
which he failed to explain and as such the
same can be taken into consideration in

support of the other evidence on file. True that
21

abscondance by itself is not sufficient to hold
an accused guilty, but when the prosecution
succeeds to bring home guilt against the
accused charged, that too, through trustworthy
and confidence inspiring witnesses, then
unexplained abscondance can be taken into
consideration and the same was rightly
considered by the learned trial court.

16. The cumulative effect of what has been
stated above leads this court to an irresistible
conclusion that the prosecution fully succeeded
in bringing home guilt against the appellant and
the impugned judgment is suffering from no
irregularity or inherent defects which would call
for interference. The impugned is well
reasoned and the learned trial court fully
appreciated the evidence on file, which calls for
no interference. The instant criminal appeal,
being bereft of any merit, is hereby dismissed.
17. Now diverting to criminal revision
No.38-P/2023_ titled “Raheem Khan vs
Abdullah ete” through which the petitioner/
complainant has requested for enhancement of
the awarded sentence. In order to appreciate
this aspect of the case, we once again went

through the impugned judgment to know as to
22

why the learned trial court failed to award the
normal penalty of death. Though no plausible
reasons are given, yet this court is to see as to
whether the learned trial court was justified to
award the awarded sentence or the same calls
for interference. As admittedly, the parties were
closely related and the unfortunate incident
occurred because of the divorce of the
daughter of the deceased, who was married to
the appellant. The record is silent that what
happened between the spouses which Jed to
the tragic incident and that why the appellant
got instigated to such an extent that he killed
the deceased. As the relationship between the
spouses could not be explained and as the
witnesses kept mum that what led the parties
to separate and that who was instrumental for
the divorce, so this court is inclined to hold that
though the daughter of the deceased was
divorced 5/6 months before the return of the
deceased from UAE, but it was few months
after the return of the deceased that the
unfortunate incident occurred. As the deceased
was done to death that too by the appellant
who was the husband of his daughter, so the

silence of the prosecution regarding the nature
23

of relationship between the parties had added
to our anxiety and it is the concealment of
some facts regarding the actual cause of killing
which persuaded this court to take the same
view as is taken by the learned trial court. As
the actual cause of killing is still shrouded in
mystery and as the witnesses failed to explain
the circumstances prevailed between the
spouses, before dissolution, so this uncertainty
regarding the motive and regarding the cause
of killing is a circumstance which persuades
this court that the learned trial court was
justified to award the awarded sentence and
the same does not call for interference. The
instant criminal revision petition is lacking

substance, which is hereby dismissed.

Announced
26.06.2024
3
=a
JUDGE
JUDGE

*Muhammad Fiaz* *D.B* Hon'ble Mr. Justice Syed Arshad Ali, J
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Sahibzada Asadullah, J
