CG

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
PESHAWAR,
{Judicial Department]

Cr.A. No.855-P/2023

Zafran s/o Kitab Khan,
r/o Shahkas Jamrud District Khyber
Appellant (s)
VERSUS
The State etc
Respondent (s)
For Appellant (s) :- Mr. Shabbir Hussain Gigyani,
Advocate
For State - Mr. Jalal ud Din Akbar-e-Azam
Khan Gara, AAG.
For complainant :- Mr. Ishtiaq-ur-Rehman, Advocate.
Date of hearing: 21.11.2023
JUDGMENT

ISHTIAQ IBRAHIM, J.- This criminal appeal, filed
by Zafran, the appellant, is directed against the
judgment dated 27.04.2023 (“ilmpugned judgment”),
passed by learned ASJ-II/Judge Juvenile Court,
Khyber (“Trial Court”), whereby he has convicted
the appellant under section 302(b) PPC and sentenced
him to undergo rigorous imprisonment for life and to
pay rupees five lac, as compensation to legal heirs of
Iqrar deceased in terms of Section 544-A Cr.P.C. and
in default thereof to further under six months simple
imprisonment. He has also convicted the appellant
under section 15 KP Arms Act, 2013 and sentenced
him to undergo rigorous imprisonment for one year

and to pay rupees ten thousand as fine and in default
thereof to further undergo one month simple
imprisonment vide case FIR No.160 dated 24.05.2021,
registered under sections 302, 324 PPC and section 15
KP Arms Act, 2013 at Police Station Jamrud District
Khyber. Benefit of Section 382-B Cr.P.C. has been
extended to him. The appellant has been acquitted
under section 324 PPC.

2. The prosecution’s case as per First
Information Report (“FIR”) Exh.PA/1 is that on
24.05.2021 at 0915 hours, Saced Khan complainant
(PW.9), in company of dead body of his nephew Iqrar
deceased, in civil hospital Jamrud, reported to Aziz
Ullah ASI (PW.1) to the effect that on the fateful day
ie. 24.05.2021 he along with deceased was present at
Bakar Abad when at 0750 hours appellant Zafran, duly
armed with firearm, came there and opened fire at
them with the intention to commit their murder, as a
result, Iqrar deceased got hit and died on the spot
whereas he luckily remained unscathed. A brawl over
children between of the parties prior to the occurrence
has been advanced as a motive behind the occurrence.
Besides him, the incident is stated to have been
witnessed by people present at the spot. Report of the
complainant was recorded in the shape of Murasila
Exh.PA by Aziz Ullah ASI (PW.1), who also prepared

injury sheet Exh.Pw.1/l and inquest report
Exh.PW.1/2 of the deceased and shifted his dead body
to the mortuary for postmortem examination under the
escort of Constable Hazrat Ullah.

3. On 24.05.2021 at 09.30 AM, Dr. Abdullah
(PW.6), conducted postmortem examination on the
dead body of Iqrar deceased aged about 12/13 years
and found the following injuries on his person:-

i. A firearm entry wound 2x1 cm,
located overhead, 10 cm above right
ear.

ii. A firearm exit wound of 3x4 cm,
located over head, 10 cm above left
ear with exposed brain material and
skull bone fracture.

Opinion:-According to his opinion, the
deceased died due to injury to his
brain due to firearm injury.

4. The task of investigation was handed over to
Naseem Khan SI (PW.11), who proceeded to the spot
and prepared site plan Exh.PB on the pointation of
complainant. During spot inspection, he secured blood
through cotton from the place of the deceased and 02
empties of 30 bore pistol vide recovery memo
Exh.PW.2/1. Vide recovery memo Exh.PW.3/1 he
took into possession the last wom bloodstained
garments of the deceased and on 04.06.2021 he
arrested appellant vide arrest Card Exh.PW.11/1. He
also placed on file daily diary qua arrest of the

appellant which is Exh.PW.11/2, obtained physical
|
4

remand of the appellant, interrogated him and on his
pointation on 06.06.2021, recovered a 30 bore pistol
along with five live rounds of the same bore from the
bed of the appellant in his house. He took the same
into possession through recovery memo Exh.PW.2/2,
recorded statements of the PWs under section 161
Cr.P.C., sent the bloodstained articles as well as the
pistol and crime empties to the FSL, reports whereof
are Exh.PZ and Exh.PZ/1 respectively. He also placed
on file extract of Register No.19 and after completion
of investigation handed over case file to the SHO, who
submitted challan against the appellant before the
learned Juvenile Court, as the appellant was a juvenile.
5. On receipt of challan by the learned trial
Court/Judge Juvenile Court, Khyber, the appellant was
summoned and formally charge sheeted to which he
pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. To prove its case,
the prosecution examined as many as eleven witnesses.
After closure of the prosecution’s evidence statement
of the appellant was recorded under section 342 Cr.P.C
wherein he denied the prosecution’s allegation and
professed his innocence. He, however, neither wished
to be examined on oath or to produce evidence in
defence. On conclusion of trial, the learned trial, court

after hearing both the sides convicted and sentenced
the appellant as mentioned in the initial paragraph of
the judgment, hence, this appeal.

6. We have heard the arguments of learned
counsel for the parties and perused the record and
evidence with their able assistance.

7. In this case the deceased was 12/13 years
old. Similarly, the appellant at the time of occurrence
was also below the age of eighteen years. As per
contents of Murasila Exh.PA and FIR Exh.PA/1
occurrence in this case has taken place on 24.05.2021
at 0750 hours in village Bakar Abad, situated at a
distance of 6/7 kilometers from Police Station Jamrud
and has been reported at 0915 hours by complainant
Saeed Khan in Civil hospital Jamrud to Aziz Ullah
ASI (PW.1). The complainant in his report Exh.PA has
mentioned “Baker Abad” as the place of occurrence
but contrary in the site plan Exh.PB the place of
occurrence is shown in the court yard of the house of
the appellant. Azir Ullah ASI (PW.1), author of
Murasila, in cross-examination has admitted it correct
that place of occurrence in the Murasila is mentioned
as “Bakar Abad”. Naseem Khan SI (PW.1)),
Investigating Officer, in his cross examination has
categorically stated that Baker Abad is a village

consisting of so many houses; that in the FIR
complainant has not specifically mentioned the place
of occurrence.

8. Complainant Saeed Khan while appearing as
PW.9 tried his level best to cover the anomaly and
flaw in his report with regard to the place of
occurrence. He deposed that Iqrar deceased was his
nephew. On the eventful day ie. 24.05.2021, he along
with deceased Iqrar, PW Ashraf and Iran Shah went to
the house of the appellant to complain about the
quarrel in between their children; that in the
meanwhile the appellant pulled out pistol and fired at
them, as a result, Iqrar deceased got hit and died at the
spot; that they shifted his dead body to civil hospital
Jamrud; that on his pointation, the 1.0. prepared site
plan Exh.PB. In cross-examination when he was
confronted with his report Exh.PA he admitted that he
has not stated in the report about their visit to the
house of the appellant and pulling out of pistol by the
appellant there; that in his report he has not mentioned
that they shifted the dead body to civil hospital
Jamrud; that he has not mentioned in his report the
names of eyewitnesses; that names of the children who
had quarreled prior to the occurrence has also not been
mentioned by him in his report; that no report was

lodged about the quarrel of the children; that the
occurrence has taken place in village Bakar Abad
Sakhi Pull.

9. The complainant in his examination-in-chief
has introduced certain new events which he has not
disclosed in his report Exh.PA. The new events
introduced by him amounts to dishonest and deliberate
improvements so as to bring his testimony in line with
the physical circumstances of the prosecution’s case.
Non-mentioning of the place of occurrence in his
report, is a strong circumstance which belies the
presence of the complainant at the spot at the time of
occurrence. He has not given any explanation, much
less, plausible as to why he did not disclose the exact
place of occurrence to the author of the Murasila. The
peculiar facts and circumstances of the case,
particularly, the crime spot inside the house of the
appellant, clearly speaks that there was something
black in the bottom and the incident has not taken
place in the mode and manner as alleged by the
complainant rather in some other mode which
remained shrouded mystery. The learned trial court has
erred in law by believing the testimony of the
complainant which is full of dishonest and deliberate
improvements hence create serious doubts in the
prosecution’s case. Such dishonest and deliberate

improvements made him unreliable and untrustworthy
witness. It is held in the case of Amir Zaman Vs,
Mahboob_and_ others (1985 _ SCMR_ 685) that
testimony of witnesses containing material
improvements are not believable and trustworthy.
Likewise in Akhtar Ali’s case (2008 SCMR 6) it has
been held that when a witness made improvement
dishonestly to strengthen the prosecution’s case then
his credibility becomes doubtful on the well-known
principle of criminal jurisprudence that improvement
once found deliberate and dishonest, cast serious doubt

on the veracity of such witness. In Khalid Javed’s

case (2003 SCMR 149) such witness who improved
his version during the trial was found wholly
unreliable. Further reference in this respect may be
made to the cases of Mohammad Shafique Ahmad
Vs. The State (PLD 1981 SC_472), Syed Saeed
Mohammad Shah and another Vs. The State (1993
SCMR 550), and Mohammad Saleem __Vs.
Mohammad Azam (2011 SCMR 474).

10. As stated earlier, from the peculiar facts and
circumstances of the case i.e. not disclosing the exact
place of occurrence by the complainant and recovery
of blood of the deceased and empties from inside the
house of the appellant, are strong facts from existence
of which it can be inferred that the occurrence has not

taken place in the mode and manner as alleged by the
complainant rather in some other mode which has been
concealed. Under Article 129 of the Qanun-e-Shahadat
Order, 1984 (*“QSO”), court may presume existence of
certain facts which it thinks likely to have happened,
regarding being had to the common course of natural
events, human conduct and public and private
business, in their relation to the facts of the particular
case. For the sake of convenience and ready reference
Article 129 of the QSO is reproduced below along
with the illustrations attached thereto.

129. Court may presume
existence of certain facts: The
Court may presume the
existence of any fact which it
thinks likely to have happened,
regard being had to the
common course of natural
events, human conduct and
public and private business, in
their relation to the facts of the

particular case.
Illustrations The Court may presume—

(a) that a man who is in possession of stolen
goods soon after the theft is either the thief or
has received the goods knowing them to be
stolen, unless he can account for his
possession ;

(b) that an accomplice is unworthy of credit,
unless he is corroborated in material
particulars ;

(c) that a bill of exchange, accepted or
endorsed, was accepted or endorsed for good

consideration ;
10

(d) that a thing or state of things which has
been shown to be in existence within a period
shorter than that within which such things or
states of things usually cease to exist, is still in
existence ;

(e) that judicial and official acts have been
regularly performed ; (f) that the common
course of business has been followed in
particular cases;

(g) that evidence which could be and is not
produced would, if produced, be unfavourable
to the person who withholds it ;

(h) that, if a man refuses to answer a question
which he is not compelled to answer by law,
the answer, if given, would be unfavourable to
him

(i) that when a document creating an
obligation is in the hands of the obligor, the
obligation has been discharged.

Article 129 (ibid) deals with “presumption of fact”. It
enables the court to infer one fact from the existence of
another proved fact having regard to the common
course of natural events or human conduct. It furnishes
prima facie evidence of the matter to which it relates
and relieves the party of the duty of giving evidence
unless his adversary has adduced proof to rebut the
presumption. It raises such high degree of probability
in its favour that it must prevail unless proof in rebuttal
thereof is given to the satisfaction of the court. The
Article does not prescribe any hard and fast rule with
regard to the circumstances in which any fact or facts
may be presumed to exist nor does it contain any

exhaustive list of such facts though undoubtedly it
11

gives a few illustrations from various walks of life.
The illustrations in Article 129 QSO are merely
examples of circumstances in which certain
presumptions may be made. The principle laid down in
the Article is one of very wide application. It covers
not merely the particular instances given in these
illustrations but all sorts of analogous cases in which
the actual facts are distinguishable from the facts
presumed by any one of the illustration but are equally
amenable to the general principle enunciated by the
Article itself. Therefore, if a question arises as to
whether the existence of a particular fact may be
presumed, the criterion for decision must be the words
of Article 129 of the QSO. This is because illustrations
in the Article are but illustrations only and it is
evidently open to a court to see the main Article itself
and consider within its ambit whether it applies to any
given set of facts and drew an inference therefrom.

11. As regards testimony of Muhammad Ashraf
(PW.10), who also poses himself to be an eyewitness
of the occurrence. Though he has verified report of the
complainant, but his name is not mentioned therein as
an eyewitness. Besides, he too, in his statement under
section 161 Cr.P.C. has not disclosed the exact “place
of occurrence” however, in his court statement

introduced events as introduced by the complainant so
12

as to bring his testimony in line with him. He deposed
that on the fateful day he along with PW Saeed, Iqrar
deceased and Iran Shah went to the house of the
appellant for complaint against quarrel between the
children and in the meanwhile the appellant pulled out
pistol and fired at them, as a result, Iqrar deceased got
hit and died on the spot. In cross-examination, he
stated that in his statement u/s 161 Cr.P.C. he has not
mentioned the date and time of occurrence; that he has
also not mentioned the date and place of quarrel
between the children; that the quarrel between the
children was also not reported to police; that none of
the said children was produced before the police; that
at the time of occurrence I was standing outside the

house adjacent to the door.

12. The testimony of PW Muhammad Ashraf
being suffering from deliberate and dishonest
improvements is also not sufficient for recording
conviction of the appellant, that too, in the capital
charge.

13. No doubt, recovery of blood from the spot,
last weyn:, bloodstained garments of the deceased,
positive Serologist report Exh.PZ in respect thereof
coupled with autopsy report of the deceased, prove the
unnatural death of the deceased with firearm, but such

pieces of circumstantial evidence never tell the
13

name(s) of the culprit(s). Such pieces of corroborative
evidence are always taken in aid of the direct evidence
and not in isolation. Hon’ble Supreme Court of
Pakistan while giving its judgment in the case of

“Muhammad Afzal alias Abdullah and others vs.

The State and others” reported _as (2009 SCMR
639) has held that;

“After taking out from consideration the
ocular evidence, the evidence of
identification and the medical evidence, we
are left with the evidence of recoveries only,
which being purely corroboratory in nature,
in our view, alone is not capable to bring
home charge against the appellant in the
absence of any direct evidence because it is
well-settled that unless direct or substantive
evidence is available conviction cannot be
recorded on the basis of any other type of
evidence howsoever, convincing it may be.”

Hon’ble Supreme Court in another judgment rendered in

the case of “Imran Ashraf & 7 others v/s The State”

reported as 2001 SCMR 424, has also observed;
“Recovery of incriminating articles is used
for the purpose of providing corroboration
to the ocular testimony. Ocular evidence
and recoveries, therefore, are to be
considered simultaneously in order to reach
for a just conclusion”.

In support of same ratio, further reliance may also be

placed on the judgment reported as 2007 SCMR 1427.

As far as medical evidence is concerned, the same is
14

also supporting piece of evidence, which may confirm
the ocular account with regard to receipt of injury,
nature of the injury, kind of weapon used in the
occurrence but it would not tell the name of the
assailant. Reference in this context may be made to the

cases of “Muhammad _Tasaweer_versus_ Hafiz

Zulkarnain and 2 others” (PLD 2009 SC 53), “Altaf
Hussain versus Fakhar Hussain and another” (2008
SCMR_1103) and “Mursal_Kazmi_alias_Qamar
Shah and another versus The State” (2009 SCMR
1410).

14, So far as recovery of 30 bore pistol on the
pointation of the appellant from room of his house,
recovery of 2 empties of .30 bore from the spot and
positive FSL report Exh.PZ/1 are concerned, no
private witness has been associated with the recovery
proceeding. Besides, no evidence has been brought on
record by the prosecution to prove the house to and the
room to be the ownership of the appellant or in his sole
occupation. In this view of the matter, plantation of the
pistol against the appellant to make the prosecution’s
case strong cannot be ruled out of consideration.
Besides, record depicts that occurrence has taken place
on 24.05.2021 and on the same date the empties were
also recovered but the empties have not been sent to

the FSL soon after its recovery, rather, were kept in
15

Police Station and after arrest of the appellant on
04.06.2021 i.e. after about twelve days i.e. 08.06.2021,
the empties along with 30 bore pistol, were sent to the
FSL. It is by now well established proposition of law
that if the crime empty is sent to the Forensic Science
Laboratory after the arrest of the accused or together
with the crime weapon, the positive report of the said
Laboratory loses its evidentiary value. Reliance in this
respect is placed on the case of “Jehangir vs. Nazar
Farid and another” (2002 SCMR 1986), “Israr_ Ali
ys. The State” (2007 SCMR 525) and “Ali Sher and
others vs. The State” (2008 SCMR 707).

15. On reappraisal of the prosecution’s evidence
we have reached to an irresistible conclusion that
prosecution has miserably failed to prove guilt of the
appellant through cogent and confidence inspiring
evidence. The prosecution evidence is pregnant with
doubts and full of dishonest and deliberate
improvement benefit of which is to be extended to the
appellant not as a matter of grace or concession but as
a matter of right. It is a settled principle of law that for
giving the benefit of the doubt it is not necessary that
there should be so many circumstances rather if only a
single circumstance creating reasonable doubt in the
mind of a prudent person is available then such benefit

is to be extended to an accused not as a matter of
16

concession but as of right. The august Supreme Court

of Pakistan in the case of “Muhammad Mansha Vs.

The State” (2018 SCMR_ 772) has enunciated the
following principle:
“Needless to mention that while giving the
benefit of doubt to an accused it is not
necessary that there should be many
circumstances creating doubt. If there is a
circumstance which creates reasonable
doubt in a prudent mind about the guilt of
the accused, then the accused would be
entitled to the benefit of such doubt, not as
a matter of grace and concession, but as a
matter of right. It is based on the maxim, "it
is better that ten guilty persons be acquitted
rather than one innocent person be
convicted". Reliance in this behalf can be
made upon the cases of Tariq Pervez v. The
State (1995 SCMR 1345), Ghulam Qadir
and 2 others v. The State (2008 SCMR
1221), Muhammad Akramy. The State
(2009 SCMR 230) and Muhammad

Zamanv.The State (2014 SCMR 749).”
Reliance is also placed on the judgment of the august
Supreme Court of Pakistan in case of Najaf Ali Shah Vs.
the State (2021 S C M_R 736) in which it has been
observed in paragraph No.13 of page 236 as below:-

“9. Mere heinousness of the offence if not

proved to the hilt is not a ground to avail the
17

majesty of the court to do complete justice.
This is an established principle of law and
equity that it is better that 100 guilty persons
should let off but one innocent person
should not suffer. As the preeminent English
jurist William Blackstone wrote, "Better that
ten guilty persons escape, than that one
innocent suffer." Benjamin Franklin, who
was one of the leading figures of early
American history, went further arguing "it is
better a hundred guilty persons should
escape than one innocent person should
suffer." All the contradictions noted by the
learned High Court are sufficient to Murder
Reference No. 58 of 2016 34 cast a shadow
of doubt on the prosecution's case, which
entitles the petitioner to the right of benefit
of the doubt. It is a well settled principle of
law that for the accused to be afforded this
right of the benefit of the doubt it is not
necessary that there should be many
circumstances creating uncertainty and if
there is only one doubt, the benefit of the
same must got to the petitioner. This Court
in the case of Mst. Asia Bibi v. The State
(PLD 2019 SC 64) while relying on the
earlier judgments of this Court has
categorically held that "if a single
circumstance creates reasonable doubt in a

prudent mind about the apprehension of
18

guilt of an accused, then he/she shall be
entitled to such benefit not as a matter of
grace and concession, but as of right.
Reference in this regard may be made to the
cases of Tariq Pervaiz v. The State (1998
SCMR 1345) and Ayub Masih v. The State
(PLD 2002 SC 1048)." The same view was
reiterated in Abdul Jabbar v. State (2010
SCMR 129) when this court observed that
once a single loophole is observed in a case
presented by the prosecution, such as
conflict in the ocular account and medical
evidence or presence of eye-witnesses being
doubtful, the benefit of such loophole/lacuna
in the prosecution's case automatically goes
in favour of an accused”.

15. Accordingly, this appeal is allowed. Conviction
and sentences of the appellant recorded by the learned
trial court vide impugned judgment dated 27.04.2023, are
hereby set aside. Consequently, the appellant is acquitted

from the charge in this case. He be set at liberty forthwith

if not confined in any other case.

Announced:

21.11.2023
M Siraj Afridi CS

ice Ishti i ior Puisne Judge; and
Hon’! r. e Sahil jullah
