JUDGMENT SHEET
PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, ABBOTTABAD BENCH

JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT

Cr.Mise.B.A.No.574-A/2018

JUDGMENT
Date of hearing ssevevars wryn2 Gnd Qr2 OLG,..,.0is ws satires sanceieonen ann reeseamann van
Petitioner (8s)... (Noor Rehman etc) by Mr. Zia-ur-Rehman Khan,

Advocate... .....

Respondent (S)..... (The State etc) by M/S Yasir Zahoor Abbasi,
Assistant AG wo...

ake ok eo 2 2k 3k

Accused-petitioners, Noor Rehman, Afsar
Muhammad Khan and Syed Nazakat Hussain Shah
were granted ad-interim pre-arrest bail by this Court
in case FIR No.92 dated 16.03.2018 under sections
380/34 of Pakistan Penal Code, 1860 registered at
Police Station Battagram, vide order dated
19.07.2018.

2. The allegations against the
accused/petitioners in this case are that they had
committed thelt in the office of complainant and took
away Notary Register lying therein, on 13.03.2018 at

unknown time.
nN

Wa

Learned counsel for the petitioners
vehemently argued that petitioner No.! Noor ur
Rehman is a poor person and ‘Chowkidar’ in a
Primary school, whereas, complainant is an advocate
of High Court and earlier on his behest a false case
under section 489-F PPC was registered against the
petitioner, wherein, his bail before arrest was
confirmed by the learned lower Court. Subsequently
the present case was registered by the complainant
against the petitioner with malafide intention and
ulterior motive to deprive the petitioner from his
salary as the petitioner No.1 and complainant were
having a joint account and entire amount is being
drawn by the complainant and when the petitioner
demanded the same he falsely charged him in the
present case; the complainant is creating hurdles by
misusing his professional status for the petitioner in
getting justice, which is very much obvious [rom the
Court proceedings available on record of the case.

On the other hand, learned counsel for
the respondent controverted the assertions of the
learned counsel for the petitioners and also challenged
the very maintainability of present bail before arrest

before this Court.
ies)

3. Arguments of the learned counsel for the
accused/petitioners and learned Assistant AG assisted
by learned counsel for the complainant heard and
record perused with their able assistance.

4. Before dilating upon the merits of the
case, this Court would like to address the question of
jurisdiction in the matter of bail before arrest and in
this regard would like to refer to the judgment of
august Apex Court in Muhammad Arshad’s case
(PLD 2009 Supreme Court 427), wherein, it has
been observed that:

“Tt was perhaps for the first’ time in
December, 1948 that by interpreting the
latter part of section 498 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure in Hidayat Ullah Khan's
Case (PLD 1949 Lah. 21- AIR 1949 Lah. 77),
the power vesting in the high Courts and the
Courts of Session to admit persons to bail
before they could be arrested, — was
authoritatively discovered by a Full Bench of
the Lahore High Court. Cornelius J. (As he
then was) epitomized the said power and its
hounds in the following words:-

"For the reasons given above,
the reply which I would give to
the question referred to us is
that, in a proper case, the High
Court has power under section
498, Criminal Procedure Code,
to make an order that a person
who is suspected of an offence
for which he may be arrested
by a Police Officer or a Court,
shall be admitted to bail. The
exercise of this power should,
however, be confined to cases
in which not only is good prima
facie ground made out for the
grant of bail in respect of the
offence alleged, but also i
should be shown that if the
petitioner were to be arrested
and refused bail, such an order
would, in all probability, be
made not from motives of
furthering the ends of justice in
relation to the case, but from
some ulterior motive, and with
the object of injuring the
petitioner, or that the petitioner
would in such an eventuality
suffer irreparable harm."

‘Thus, in view of the above, this Court has the powers

to entertain and admit persons to bail before arrest,

within the contemplation of section 498 Cr.P.C,
especially where reasonable grounds exist, as
highlighted in the above referred case, such as, good
prima facie case, malafide, ulterior motives,
apprehension of arrest and mal treatment by the
investigating agency or any other cause which will
eventually cause humiliation, irreparable loss and
harm to an accused person.

5. Perusal of record would reveal that the
complainant in his first application submitted to the
SHO has charged Afsar Muhammad Khan
(accused/petitioner), one Khali Rokhan, his brother
and Nazakat Hussain Shah, Incharge Record Room
D.C. Office Battagram (accused/petitioner) — for
committing theft of Notary Register from the office of
complainant, who is an advocate by profession. ‘The

said application was entered at ‘Madd’ No.13 dated
an

15.03.2018. ‘Thereafter, he submitted another
application, which was entered at ‘Madd’ No.15 dated
15.03.2018 in which he charged accused/petitioners
Noor-ur-Rehman, Afsar Muhammad Khan and Syed
Navakat Ilussain Shah for the commission of the
offence by exonerating his brother Khali Rokhan.
Later, the complainant submitted another application,
which was entered at ‘Madd’ No.19 dated 15.03.2018,
wherein, he sought action against Incharge Record
Room, D.C. Office, Battagram, Syed Nazakat ITussain
Shah, accused/petitioner. The local police during
inquiry under section 156(3) Cr.P.C placed copy of an
application dated 13.03.2018 submitted by the
accused/petitioner, Noor ur Rehman, to the learned
Additional Sessions Judge, Battagram in case titled
‘Noor ur Rehman vs. The State’, secking summoning
of Notary Register through Incharge Record Room,
Deputy Commissioners Office, Battagram for
evidence in the titled case, which was fixed for
14.03.2018. ‘The said register was brought by the
accused/petitioner Syed Nazakat Hussain Shah before
the Court being Incharge Record Room General for
evidence in the case. There is no direct evidence
against the accused/petitioners regarding the alleged

theft from the office of the complainant situated in
6

Battagram. It is worth to mention that carlicr a case
under Section 489-F PPC was registered against the
accused/petitioner, namely, Noor Rehman, wherein,
the present complainant was counsel for the
complainant in the said case. Perusal of the said order
would reveal that accused/petitioner Noor-ur-Rehman
is Chowkidar in Government Primary School and also
tenant of Abdullah Khan, complainant in the present
case. In the said case of 489-I’, father of complainant
in that case appeared before the Court and belied the
version of the complainant in that casc. Tle also
mentioned in his affidavit that actual dispute was
regarding tenancy and salary of accused/petitioner.
‘The most interesting aspect of the said case was that
the cheque allegedly issued by Noor-ur-Rehman,
accused/petitioner, pertains to his salary account,
which is a joint account of accused/petitioner and the
present complainant. The learned Additional Sessions
Judge, Battagram observed in order dated 14.03.2018
that the accused/petitioner was falsely implicated in
the case with malafide intention on the part of the
complainant and Abdullah Khan, Advocate.

6. Thus, this Court, in view of this
backdrop, concludes that malafide on the part of the

complainant is palpable on face of record of the case
and it appears that accused/petitioner Noor-ur-
Rehman has been implicated in the instant case with
malafide intention and ulterior motive. Moreover,
accused/petitioners Afsar Muhammad Khan and Syed
Navakat Ilussain Shah have nothing to do with the
instant case and they have also been falscly charged in
the case.

Ts Consequently, this application for grant
of pre-arrest bail is allowed and ad-interim pre- arrest
bail already granted to the accused-petitioners, vide
order dated 19.07.2018 stands confirmed.

peal) ©

Dt.29-10-2018. JUDGE

M.Saleem/*
