Judgment Sheet

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
ABBOTTABAD BENCH.

JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT

Cr.M/B.No. 768-A/2018.

JUDGMENT
Date of hearing: 22/10/2018

Petitioner (Raj Malikdad) By Mr. Junaid Anwar
Khan, Advocate.

State by: Mr. Yasir Zahoor Abbasi, Assistant AG.

Complainant by: Nemo.

SYED MUHAMMAD ATTIQUE SHAH, _J:-
Accused/petitioner Raj Malik Dad seeks his
release on bail in case FIR No. 21 dated
24.05.2018 under Section 302/324/148/149/
295/201 PPC read with Section 15 AA KPK of
Police Station Karor, District Torghar.

2. Brief but essential facts of the case
as per FIR are that complainant Said Muhammad
Khan S/o Abdul Akbar reported the matter to the
local police that he along with Said Rehman S/o
Wazit Khan were coming out of the mosque after
offering Zohar Prayers and when came in the

courtyard of mosque, Zubair and Zugaib Ahmed
armed with knives, Zahir Dad S/o Latif armed
with pistol were present. Zubair and Zuqaib
attempted at the life of Said Rehman by
inflicting Churri blows to him while Zahir Daad
made firing upon Said Rehman with 30 bore
pistol as a result of which he died on the spot. On
hue and cry of the complainant, his relatives as
well as the relatives of the accused party duly
armed with Kalashnikovs and knives attracted to
the spot. Raj Malik Daad made firing with
Kalashnikov which resulted into death of Mst.
Sahib Roza as well as firearm injury to Rubina
Bibi. Atta Ullah inflicted knife blows to
Bakhtmeen Khan and Taj Ameen. Naseeb Dad
inflicted Churri blow to Dalil Khan. Occurrence
was witnessed by the complainant and his

companions present at the spot.

3. Arguments heard and record gone
through.
4. Perusal of record reveals that

accused/petitioner is charged for making
effective firing upon Mst. Sahib Roza as well as

Mst. Rubina Bibi. Mst. Sahib Roza succumbed
to the injuries at the spot, while Mst. Rubina Bibi
was injured. The record further suggests that
post mortem examination of deceased Mst.
Sahib Roza was not conducted to ascertain the
apparent cause of her death. Similarly, during
course of investigation no statement of injured
Mst. Rubina Bibi could be recorded. It is also
worth mentioning that one Zahir Daad also
lodged report regarding the present incident vide
FIR No. 22 dated 24.05.2018 of Police Station
Karor, which is a cross version of present case.
When both the FIRs are read in juxtaposition, it
seems that it was a free fight between the parties
resulting into injuries to several persons as well
as murders from both sides. Keeping in view the
cross versions as well as the fact that there is
neither any medico-legal report nor postmortem
reports of the deceased to substantiate the
version of complainant. Therefore, at present the
case against the accused/petitioner squarely falls
within the ambit of further inquiry. Co-accused
Zuqaib, charged for the murder of deceased Said

Rehman, has already been granted bail by this
court vide order dated 01.08.2018, thus on the
basis of principle of consistency too, accused/
petitioner deserves concession of bail.

5. Resultantly, the petition in hand is
accepted. Accused/petitioner be released on bail
on furnishing bail bonds in the sum of Rs.
100,000/- with two sureties each in the like
amount to the satisfaction of Judicial
Magistrate/MOD concerned, who shall ensure
that sureties are local, reliable and men of means.

Announced. yw?
Dt.22.10.2018.
A DGE

Tufail*/ Hon’ble Justice Syed Muhammad Attique Shah.
