Judgment Sheet

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
PESHAWAR

(Judicial Department)

Cr.MBA No. 771-P/2021.
Sadiq Vs The State.

JUDGMENT

Date of hearing. 17.05.2021.

Petitioner(s) by: Mr. Shabbir Hussain Gigyani
Advocate.

Complainant by: Mr. Qaiser Zaman Advocate.

State by: Mr. Muhammad Sohail AAG.

wae

S M ATTIQUE SHAH, J:-Through instant bail petition,
petitioner Sadiq seeks his release on bail in case FIR No.337
dated 25.03.2016, registered under Sections 302/324/34
PPC, at Police Station Bhana Mari Peshawar, wherein he
alongwith co-accused Yousaf Ullah are charged for
indiscriminate firing at complainant party; which resulted
into death of Qazi Khan (father of complainant Hizbullah) and

their driver Shakoor Khan; while complainant escaped

unhurt.
2. I have heard learned counsel for the parties and
gone through the record.
3. It is pertinent to mention that prayer of petitioner
for his release on bail on merit has already been dismissed
upto this Court vide order dated 11.05.2020 and; now he is
seeking his release on bail through instant petition on medical
ground.
4. The record reveals that during pendency of instant
bail petition, an application (Cr.M No.42-P/2021), was filed on
behalf of petitioner, for his examination through Standing
Medical Board in order to determine gravity of his ailment;
which was allowed with direction to Director General Health
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, to constitute a Standing Medical Board
for examination of petitioner and pursuant thereto, petitioner |
was examined by Standing Medical Board and; submitted the
following report:

“that patient with history of back pain

referring to lower limbs. He had

sciatica for which surgery

(Lamenectomy was done). He is

complaining of pain and numbness in

lower limbs. He needs special care for

his back and spine. It is a genuine

case. He should be under care of

Neurosurgeon or spine surgeon.”
5. The ibid report has not provided that petitioner is

suffering from such an illness, which is hazardous to his life;

rather, it has only been mentioned that he needs special care
for his back and spine and he should be under the care of
Neurosurgeon or spine surgeon. Though as per report of
Senior Medical Officer posted at Central Prison Peshawar, his
treatment is not possible inside the jail; however, the ibid
report shows that petitioner was referred to Neurosurgery
OPD, Khyber Teaching Hospital Peshawar for specialized
treatment, meaning thereby that the jail authorities are taking
proper care of the petitioner by producing him for his
treatment before Neurosurgeon at KTH, Peshawar.

6. Moreover, as per record, petitioner after long
abscondence of three years, obtained BBA from the competent
Court of law on 10.12.2019 and; astonishingly, he did his
surgery (Lamenectomy) in Pakistan Medical & Diagnostic
Center Rawalpindi on even date ie, 10.12.2019; meaning
thereby that the plea of medical ground was available to him at
that time and; subsequently as well, at the time of his post
arrest bail before the learned lower Court and; before this
Court too; but, despite that the petitioner did not seek bail on
medical ground; rather, waited for the fate of his bail petitions
so filed on merit and; when he failed to get his release on bail
on merit; then, he applied for his release on medical ground in

second round, therefore, instant petition is also not
maintainable. Given, that under the law, bail could be granted
to an accused on medical ground; provided if he could make
out a case on such ground. However, as earlier discussed the
ailment of the petitioner is not as such, which is either
hazardous to his life or the same could not be treated from the
jail, therefore, the discretion so available under the law could
not be exercised in his favor. Besides, the case law so
produced by learned counsel for petitioner is distinguishable;
as it is nowhere mentioned in the report of Standing Medical
Board that petitioner is suffering from a chronic or such a
hazardous disease which is serious threat to his life or his
detention in jail premises is dangerous to his life. Moreover,
the jail authorities are producing the petitioner for his
treatment before the concerned doctor without any fail.
Therefore; instant bail petition is dismissed. However,
Superintendent Jail is directed to provide the petitioner special
care and also make arrangement for his examination by a
doctor of his choice, as and when required, in accordance with
law. Moreover, since trial against petitioner has already been
commenced and; four witnesses have already been examined;

while a few abandoned by the prosecution; hence, learned trial
atm tk

Court in the circumstances, is expected to conclude the trial

expeditiously.

Announced:

17.05.2021.
CET
JUDGE

“A.Qayum PS”* (SB) Hon’be Mr, Justice S M Aitique Shah
