-1-

JUDGMENT SHEET
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
MINGORA BENCH (DAR-UL-QAZA), SWAT |
(Judicial Department)

Cr.R No. 56-M/2019

Abdar son of Shah Sultan resident of Nokara, Tehil Matta,
District Swat.

(Petitioner)
Versus
The State and one other
(Respondents)
Present:
Mr. Munir Ahmad, Advocate for State.
Muhammad Haq Nawaz, Assistant A.G. for
State.
Respondent No:2. alongwith his father in person.
Date of hearing: 08.10.2019

Date of Announcement: 15.10.2019

JUDGMENT
SYED ARSHAD ALI, J.- Through this criminal
revision petition, the petitioner namely Abadar, who-
is accused in case F.I.R No. 163 dated 11.03.2019

ws 377 P.P.C read with section 53 of the Khyber:

- Pakhtunkhwa Child Protection and Welfare Act,

2010, has challenged the order of the learned trial
Court dated 21.05.2019 whereby his application for
deletion of Section 7 of the Anti-Terrorism Act,
1997 from the aforesaid F.LR and sending of the
case to regular Court under Section 23 of the said

Act was dismissed.

OB: Hon'ble Mz. Justice Syed Arshad All

Hon’ble Mr. Justice Wiaar Ahmad
{Cr.R No, 56-M of 2019 56-M of 2019 Abdar Vs. The Stote and another)
J.

Taamuyess|

-2-

2. The present petitioner, whose age,
according to the record, is 25 years, is charged for
committing rape of minor victim namely Fawad,
aged about 11 years, inside the house of the.

petitioner/accused.

3. The learned counsel for the petitioner
has argued that for the offences relating to child
abuse a separate law has been enacted known as the
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Child Protection and Welfare
Act, 2010 and according to Section 15 of the said
Act, the Provincial Government may notify the
Courts which can take cognizance of the like
matters. In support of his arguments, he produced
the case law reported as 2018 MLD 314 [Gilgit-
Baltistan Chief Court], 2017 YLR 936 [Gilgit-
Baltistan Chief Court], 2017 P Cr. L J Note 246
[Sindh (Sukkur Bench)], PLJ 2016 Cr.C (Lahore).

155 and 1999 YLR 1716 [Lahore].

iN

The learned A.A.G. has argued that in
the present case the act of the accused has created
terror in the entire society as it has put the security
of all the teenagers at stake, hence, the offence in
question squarely falls within the mischief of the
Anti-Terrorism Act, 1997 (“Act”) and is triable by.

the Anti-Terrorism Court. He placed reliance on

DB: Hon'ble Mr. Justice Syed Arshad All

{Cr.R No. 56-0 of 2019 56-M of 2019 Abdar Vs. The Stote and another)
-3-
PLD 2009 Supreme Court 11, PLD 2006 Supreme
Court 524, 2019 P Cr.L J 57 [Gilgit-Baltistan .
Chief Court], 2016 GBLR 199 [Supreme
Appellate Court], PLD 2012 Baluchistan 122,
2007 P Cr.L. J 11 [Northern Areas Chief Court]

and PLD 2000 Lahore 449.

5. Messers Aurangzeb Advocate and
Asad-ur-Rehman, Barrister-at-Law, were appointed
as amicus curie to assist this Court on the aforesaid
issue. The learned counsels have referred to Allah
Wasaya V/s. The State and 06 others” (2001 YLR
3309 [Lahore]) and “The State V/s. Abdul Malik
alias Malkoo” (PLD 2000 Lahore 449) and stated
that although there was an earlier view that the
matters relating to child molestation and gang rape.
were exclusively triable by the special Court
established under the Act, however, later the august
Supreme Court of Pakistan has held in various
judgments that the striking feature for attracting the
jurisdiction of the special Court is that the impugned
act must have caused terror in a particular section of
the society. Reliance has been placed on 2017
SCMR 1572, PLD 2016 Supreme Court 17, PLD
2016 Supreme Court 1. The learned counsel also

referred to the Criminal Law (Amendment)

Tajarnuyese| ’ o8:; Hon'ble Mr. tustice Syed Arshad All

Hon‘ble Mr Justice Wioar Ahmad
{CR No, 56M of 2019 56-M of 2019 Abdar Vs, The State and another)
-4-

(Offences Relating to.Rape) Act, 2016 (Act XLIV
of 2016) whereby certain offences in the Pakistan
Penal Code (ACT XLV OF 1860) (“PPC”) relating

to rape were amended and Section 376-(1A) was

introduced in the PPC whereby the law was made

Tajarmuyrs|

more harsh on the accused who are involved in child
molestation or rape cases. He has further maintained
that if the legislation had the intention to bring the
offence of rape within the scheduled offences, it
would have done so by making specification thereof

in the Act to be a scheduled offence.

6. We have heard the arguments of learned
counsel for the parties as well as of the learned:
amicus curie and perused the record with their able

assistance.

7. The case of the present petitioner is
that the offence for which he is charged is neither a
schedule offence nor is punishable under Section 7
of the Act, hence, the same is triable by ordinary
Court of law. The learned trial Court, while turning
down application of the petitioner has relied upon
“The State V/s. Abdul Malik alias Malkoo” (PLD
2000 Lahore 449) wherein it was held that child
molestation being not only heinous in nature but

would also constitute a “terrorist act” as defined in

DB: Hon‘bie Mr. Justice Syed Arshad All

Hon‘bie Mr. justice Wigar Ahmad
(Cr.R No, SE-M of 2019 56-M of 2019 Abder Vs. The State ond another)
Tajamul/Ps*,

-5-
Section 6 of the Act, hence, the same offence is to be

tried by Anti-Terrorism Court.

The same view also reflects in “Allah

Wasaya V/s, The State and 06 others” (2001 YLR’

3309 [Lahore]). The close perusal of the said
judgments would show that child molestation was at
the relevant time a scheduled offence exclusively
triable by special Court, therefore, in the present
case it would be appropriate to trace the original text
of Sections 6 and 7 of the Act as well as the

subsequent amendments therein.

& The original text of Section 6 in the

unamended Act is as following.

“6. Terrorist act.--- Whoever, to strike
terror in the people, or any section of the
people, or to alienate any section of the
people or to adversely affect harmony
among different sections of the people, does
any act or thing by using bombs, dynamite
or other explosive or inflammable
substances, or fire-arms, or other lethal
weapons or poisons or noxious gases or
chemicals or other substances of a hazardous
nature in such a manner as to cause, or to be
likely to cause the death of, or injury to, any
person or persons, or damage to, or
destruction of, property or disruption of any
supplies of services essential to the life of
the community or displays fire-arms, or
threatens with the use of force public
servants in order to prevent them from
discharging their lawful duties commits a
terrorist act”.

* DB: Hon’ble Mr. Justice Syed Arshad All

Hon‘ble Mr Justice Wigar Ahmad
{C1.R No, 56-M of 2019 S6-M of 2019 Abdor Vs. The State and another)
-6-

Section 6 of the Act was indeed
completely substituted for the first time through:
Ordinance IX of 1998. The amended text of Section

6 is as under:-

“6. Terrorist act. --- A person is said to commit
a terrorist act if he,
(a) in order to, or if the effect of his action will
be to, strike terror or create a sense of fear
_and insecurity in the people, or any section
of the people, or to alienate any section of
people, or to adversely affect harmony
among different sections of the people,
does any act or thing by using bombs,
dynamite or other explosive or
inflammable substances, or such fire-arms
or other lethal weapons as may be
notified, or poisons or noxious gases or
chemicals, in such a manner as to cause,
or be likely to cause, the death of, or injury
fo, any person or persons, or damage to,
or destruction of, property on a large
scale, or a widespread disruption of
supplies of services essential to the life of
the community, or threatens with the use of
force public servants in order to prevent
them from discharging their lawful duties;
or

(b) commits a scheduled offence, the effect of
which will be, or be likely to be, to strike
terror, or create a sense of fear and
insecurity in the people, or any section of
the people, or to alternate any section of
the people , or to adversely affect harmony
among different sections of the people; or

(c) commits an act of gang rape, child

molestation, or robbery coupled with rape
as specified in the schedule to the Act.

This law was once again amended

through Ordinance IV of 1999 as following.

“6. Terrorist Act---A person is said to commit a
terrorist act if he,

Tejamuy/pss| OB: Hon'ble Mr. Justice Syed Arshad All

Hon‘ble Mc, Justice Wigar Ahmad
(C2.8 No. S&-M of 2019 56-M of 2019 Abdor Vs. The State and another)
Tajamul/Ps*

(a)

(b)

(¢)

(d)

-7-

in order to, or if the effect of his actions
will be to, strike terror or create a sense of
Jear and insecurity in the people, or any
section of the people, does any act or thing
by using bombs, dynamite or other
explosive or inflammable substances, or
such fire-arms or other lethal weapons as
may be notified, or poisons or noxious
gases or chemicals, in such a manner as to
cause, or be likely to cause, the death of,
or injury to, any person or persons, or
damage to, or destruction of, property on a
large scale, or a widespread disruption of
supplies of services essential to the life of
the community, or threatens with the use of
force public servants in order to prevent
them from discharging their lawful duties;
or

commits a scheduled offence, the effect of
which will be, or be likely to be, to strike
terror, or create a sense of fear and
insecurity in the people, or any section of
the people, or to adversely affect harmony
among different sections of the people; or
commits an act of gang rape, child
molestation, or robbery coupled with rape
as specified in the Schedule to this Act; or
commits an act of civil commotion as
specified in section 7A.

Through another Ordinance XXXIX of

2001, the Act was almost restructured and Section 6

was completely substituted for the following:-

"6,

oe:

Terrorism.--(1) In this Act, "terrorism"
means the use or threat of action where:

(a) the action falls within the meaning of
subsection (2); and

(b) _ the use or threat is designed to coerce
and intimidate or overawe the
Government or the public or a section
of the public or community or sect or
create a sense of fear or insecurity in
Society; or

(c) the use of threat is made for the
purpose of advancing a religious,
sectarian or ethnic cause.

Hon'ble Mr. Justice Syed Arshad All

Hon’ble Mr. Justice Wigar Ahmad
{Cr.R No, S6-M of 2019 56-M of 2019 Abdar Vs. The State ond another)
(2)
(a)

()

()
(d)

(e)

(g)

(h)

@

@
H

Y)

-8-

An "action" shall fall within the meaning
of subsection (1), if it:

involves the doing of anything that
causes death;

involves grievous violence against a
person or grievous bodily injury or
harm to a person;

involves grievous damage to property;

involves the doing of anything that is
likely to cause death or endangers a
person's life;

involves kidnapping for ransom,
hostage-taking or hijacking;

incites hatred and contempt on
religious, sectarian or ethnic basis to
stir. up violence or cause internal
disturbance;

involves stoning, brick-batting or any
other form of mischief to spread
panic;

involves firing on religious
congregations, mosques,
imambargahs, churches, temples and
all other places of worship, or random
firing to spread panic, or involves any
Jorcible takeover of mosques or other
places of worship;

creates. a serious risk to safety of the
public or a section of the public, or is
designed to frighten the general public
and thereby prevent them from coming
out and carrying on their lawful trade
and daily business, and disrupts civic
life;

involves the burning of vehicles or any
other serious form of arson;

involves extortion of money ("bhatta")

or property;

is designed to seriously interfere with

or ‘seriously disrupt a

communications system or public
_ utility service;

(m) involves serious coercion or intimidation

(n)

Tajamul/Ps” OB:

of a public servant in order to force
him to discharge or to refrain from
discharging his lawful duties; or

involves serious violence against a
member of the police force armed

Hon’ble Mr. Justice Syed Arshad Ali

Hon'ble Mr Justice Wigar Ahmad
{Cr.R No. 56-M of 2019 56-M of 2019 Abdar Vs, The State ond another}
Talamul/Ps*

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

9.

-9-

Jorces, civil armed forces, or a public
servant.

The use or threat of use of ‘any action
falling within subsection (2), which
involves the use of fire-arms, explosives or
any other weapon, is terrorism, whether or
not subsection I(c) is satisfied.

In this section "action" includes an act or a
series of acts.

In this Act, terrorism includes any act done
jor the benefit of a_ proscribed
organization.

A person who commits an offence under
this section or any other provision of this
Act, shall be guilty of an act of terrorism.

In this Act, a "terrorist" means

(a) a person who has committed an offence
of terrorism under this Act, and is or
has been concerned in the
commission, preparation or
instigation of acts of terrorism;

(6) a person who is or has been whether
before or after the coming into force
of this Act, concerned in the
commission, preparation - or
instigation of acts of terrorism, shall
also be included in the meaning given
in clause (a) above."

(emphasis supplied)

The amendment introduced through

Act XXXIX Act 2001, has indeed restructured

the application of the Act to certain offences.

Prior to the said amendment, it was the effect of

the criminal act ( actus reuse) which was a

deciding factor for applicability of section 6 of the

Act that is the “effect of the action”, whereas after

amendment of 2001 it is the mens rea to “cause

Hon'ble Mr. Justice Syed Arshad All

Hon'ble Mr, Justice Wioar Ahmad
{C1.R No, 5&-M of 2019 56-M of 2019 Abdor Vs, The State and another}
-10-
terror” is the deciding factor for application of

section 6 to any schedule offence.

The close perusal of the amended
Section 6 would show that in Clause (a) of sub-
section (1) which defines “terrorism” after the semi-
collen (;) the word ‘and’ appears. Similarly, the:
word “or” appears after clause (b) and the aforesaid
sub-section (1), which indicates the intention of the
Legislation behind the substitution of Section 6
through Ordinance XXXIX of 2001. Thus, the
inference would be that whenever the offences as
enumerated in sub-section 2 of Section 6 is
committed by an accused with an aim to coerce and
intimidate or overawe the Government, the public or
section of public, community etc. or for advancing
religious, sectorial or ethnic cause etc., it is then the
provision of Section 6 of the Act which is to

attracted.

The offence of rape although prior to.

the Anti-Terrorism (Amendment) Ordinance, 2001

_ was a scheduled offence but after that Section 6 was

Toamuypst|

re-structured and the offence of rape or child
molestation does not appear to be a “terrorist act”
under Section 6 of the Act. We agree with the

learned Amicus Curie that if the legislation had the

DB: Hon’bte Mr. fustice Syed Arshad Alt

Hon'ble Mr, Justice Wigar Ahmad
(C2.R No. S6-M of 2019 56-M of 2019 Abdor Vs, The Stote and anather)
-ll-

intention to bring the offence of rape within the
scheduled offences then it would have by clear
intent described it in sub-section (2) of Section 6 of
the Act. However, in order to fully comprehend the
issue it would be appropriate to refer to the various
judgments of the superior Court, where this issue has

been resolved.

10. In “Basharat_Ali V/s. The Special

Judge Anti-Terrorism _Court-IT, Gujranwala_and

others” (PLD 2004 Lahore 199) the Honourable.
Lahore High Court, Lahore has held that the test to
determine whether a particular act is "terrorism" or
not is the motivation, object, design or purpose
behind the act and not the consequential effect
created by such act. "Terrorism", in this context has
to be understood as a species different and apart
from terror, horror, shock, fear, insecurity, panic or

disgust created by an ordinary crime.

ii. In “Bashir_Ahmad V/s, Muhammad
Siddique and others” (PLD 2009 Supreme Court
11) wherein the case of the complainant party was

that they were assaulted by the accused near their

haveli duly armed whereby four persons were done

Tajamul/Ps* |

to death and some of them sustained serious injuries;

thereafter, the accused made their escape good while

oa: Hon'ble Mr. Justice Syed Arshad All

Hon’ble Me Justice Wigar Ahmad
(C1.R No, 56-M of 2019 56-M of 2019 Abdar Vs, The State and another)
-12-

making aerial firing, creating terror, insecurity and
traumatic effect in the locality. The motive in the
said case was blood feud enmity between the parties.
In the said judgement, the august Supreme Court of
Pakistan has held that the judicial consensus seems
to be that striking off terror is sine gua non for the
application of the provisions as contained in Section
6 of the Act and since the act complained in the
F.I.R has resulted in striking terror and sense of
insecurity in a particular vicinity, therefore, the said

act of the accused was an act of terrorism.

12. In “Ahmad Jan V/s. Nasrullah_and
others” (2012 SCMR 59) the august Supreme Court
of Pakistan after analyzing the various aspects of the
Act has laid down the following rules for trying of .
an offence by the Special Court established under

the Act.

“The motive for the occurrence is enmity
inter se the parties on account of some
previous murders. In this view of the
matter, we are of the opinion that since
motive was enmity inter se the parties, the
application of section 7 of the Act, which
primarily requires the spread of sense of
insecurity and fair in the common mind is
lacking in the present case. The
occurrence neither reflects any act of
terrorism nor it was a sectarian matter
instead the murders in question were

Tapmul/Ps*| - OB: Hon'ble Mr. Justice Syed Arshad All

Hon'ble Mr Justice Winer Ahmad
(Ct.R No. S&-M of 2019 56-M of 2019 Abdar Vs, The State and another)
Tajamutypse|

-13-

committed owing to previous enmity

between the two groups”. _
13. In “Shahbaz Khan alias Tippu_and

others V/s. Special Judge Anti-Terrorism Court

No. 3, Lahore and others” (PLD 2016 Supreme
Court 1), the facts of the case were that there was a
dispute over a house between the parties, the
accused party alongwith four unknown person duly
armed with weapons had opened indiscriminate
firing on the complainant party as a result thereof the
father of the complainant and his 03 brothers were
killed whereas his two cousins were seriously
injured. In the said judgment no definite findings
were given by the august Supreme Court of Pakistan
but it was held that the surrounding circumstances of
the case can be interpreted in order to ascertain as to
whether the act of accused fell within the ambit of

the Act.

14. In the case of “Muhammad Mumtaz
Qadri_V/. The State_and_ others” (PLD 2016
Supreme Court 17), when Muhammad Mumtaz
Qadri, the appellant/convict, was charged for the
murder of the then Governor of Punjab, the august
Supreme Court of Pakistan while upholding his

conviction u/s 7 of the Act by the trial Court has

be: Hon'ble Mr. Justice Syed Arshad All

Hon‘ble Mr, Justice Widar Ahmad
{Cr.R No, S6-M of 2019 56-M of 2019 Abdar Vs. The State and nether}
Tajamul/Ps*

-14-
held that action of the accused for killing the
deceased and the intention, design or purpose behind
such action fully attracted the definition of terrorism
contained in Section 6 of the Act as his mens rea
was evident from his statement u/s 342, Cr.P.C
wherein he has stated that the murder of deceased
was a “lesson for all the apostates, as finally they

have to meet the same fate”.

is. In “Waris Ali and_5 others VA. The
State” (2017 SCMR 1572) the Hon’ble apex Court.
has very elaborately dealt with the matter. The facts
of the said case were that 4 person including a child
were killed whereas eight other persons were
seriously injured by the accused and the crime was

committed with a previous motive. In this judgment

the august Supreme Court of Pakistan has mentioned

the history and the purpose for which the Act was
enacted and, while disapproving the conviction u/s 6

& 7 of the Act, held that:-

“24, True, that in section 6 read with
section 7 of the Special Act, offences of
murder, attempted murder or causing
bodily hurt or injury have been made
cognizable by the Special Court, however,
from the qualifying words, preceding the
description of offences under subsection
(1) of section 6 read with the provisions of
section 7 the intention of the Legislature
becomes __ perceivable/visible that in

DB: Hon'ble Mr. Justice Syed Arshad Ali

Hon'ble Mr, Justice Wigar Ahmad
{Cr.R No. S6-M of 2019 56-M of 2019 Abdar Vs, The Stote and another}
s
mo

-15-

committing these crimes essentially the
element of "terrorism" shall be persuasive
factor however other category of crimes
duly specified and listed in Special Act
shall fall within the ambit of provision of
same being act of terrorism in that regard.
The manifest intent of the Legislature does
not leave behind any doubt for debate.

25, In certain circumstances, offences
of murder or bodily harm, committed by
the individuals in a sudden fight, even at
public places, due to sudden flare up
where the reason preceding such fight is
concealed by both the parties, shall also
not fall within the definition of terrorism
because the object to be achieved is not
terrorism or to carry out terrorist
activities, therefore, courts shall not
hurriedly jump at the conclusion that any
such offence(s) are acts of terrorism in all
open and shut cases of ordinary crimes
where object is not terrorism nor the
culpable act committed is directed to carry
out terrorist activities, shall not be forcibly
brought within the ambit of the provisions
of Special Act.

26. The famous Jurists on construction
and interpretation of Statute are almost in
agreement that whenever Penal Statute
requires interpretation then, it shall be so
interpreted, which favours the accused
person and not the State. Reference may
be made in this regard to the case of
Brig.(Retd.) F.B. Ali and another v. The
State (PLD 1975 SC 506) and the case
King v. Aung Nyum [(Q.B) 42
Crl.L.J.125]. In the above cited precedents
the principle that Penal Statute has to be
strictly construed was adopted. Question
of carrying forward any legal fiction does
not arise in such cases and whenever there
is a room where a Penal Statute is
susceptible to two interpretations, then it

Tajarnul/PS*

DB: Hon’ble Mr, Justice Syed Arshad All

Hon’ble Mr. Justice Wiaar Ahmad
{Cr.R No, SE-M of 2019 56-M of 2019 Abdar Vs. The State and onother)
oe

Tajamuy/Pss|

-16-

must be interpreted in favour of the
accused. ‘

27, ‘If the Legislature intended to bring
the crimes of routine murder, attempted
murder or causing bodily hurt within the
ambit of the provisions of the Special Act
then, it would have not employed the word
of terrorism or terrorist activities. The
comprehensive list of terrorism related
offences against the public at large/society
and in particular places of worship and
educational institutions, offences against
law enforcing agencies, armed forces, is
the clear manifestation of intent of the law
givers. This fact by itself signifies the
intention of the Legislature what it
actually intended to achieve. Although,
incidentally, in ordinary crimes
sometimes, the damage caused to human
life might be devastating, gruesome and
heart sickening, however, this by itself
would be not sufficient reason to bring the
crime within the fold of terrorism or to
attract the provision of section 6 or section
7 of the Special Act, unless the object
intended to be achieved was falling within
the category of crimes, clearly perceivable
to create terror in people or/and sense of
insecurity”.

16. In “Kashif Ali V/s. The Judge, Anti-

Terrorism, Court No, II, Lahore and others” (PLD

2016 Supreme Court 951), the petitioner in the
case, was charged by the complainant for the murder
of his brother who was a contesting candidate for the
seat of Provincial Assembly and was mercilessly
killed at a public place by the accused and his

accomplice. In the said case, the august Supreme

OB: Hon'ble Mr, tustice Syed Arshad All

Hon'ble Mr, Justice Wigar Ahmad
{Cr.R No, $6-M of 2019 56-M of 2019 Abdor Vs. The State ond ancther}
,
a

Tajamul/ps*

-17-

Court of Pakistan, while considering all the case law
on the subject, has laid certain guidelines for the
Anti-Terrorism Courts to assume jurisdiction in the
case where the act complaint of amounts to terrorism )
in the society. Para 12 of the said judgment is worth

perusal which is reproduced as under:

“12. The term "design" now used in
Section 6 of the Act has widened the scope
of the Act and the terms “intention” and
"motive" previously used have been
substituted with the sole object that if the
act is designed to create a sense of fear or
insecurity in society, then the Anti-
Terrorism Court will have the
jurisdiction. From the above definition of
the term "design" it is clear that it means
a plan or scheme conceived in mind and
intended for subsequent execution. In
order to determine whether an offence
falls within the ambit of Section 6 of the
Act, it would be essential to have a glance
over the allegations levelled in the F.LR,
the material collected by the investigating
agency and the surrounding
circumstances, depicting the commission
of offence. Whether a particular act is an
act of terrorism or not, the motivation,
object, design or purpose behind the said
Act has to be seen. The term "design",
which has given a wider scope to the
jurisdiction of the Anti-terrorism Courts
excludes the intent or motive of the
accused. In other words, the motive and
intent have lost their relevance in a case
under Section 6(2) of the Act. What is
essential to attract the mischief of this
Section is the object for which the act is
designed”.

Os: Hon'ble Mr. Justice Syed Arshad All

Hon'ble Mr Justice Winar Abmad
(Cr.R No. SE-M of 2019 56-M of 2019 Abdar Vs, The State and another}
-18-

Thus, the grounds asserted in the case
were not considered for deletion of section 7 of the
Act from the case and the issue was elaborately

answered in Para 16 of the judgment as following.

“16. The contention of the Counsel for
the Respondents that the parties have
personal enmity is also insignificant, as the
personal enmity between the deceased and
the Respondent No.2 could have been
settled on any day and it is intriguing as to
why the Respondents chose that particular
night before the dawn of the day of
elections to settle his score with a popular
running candidate. in the elections by
eliminating him from this world. To say
that the mere reason that a motive of.
personal rivalry existed in this particular
case does not rule out the fact that anyone
could have foreseen the impact of such an
act on the supporters of the deceased
candidate. It is important to notice that
according to the F.LR, cars and people
present at the back started fleeing from
the area of incident in fear. More
importantly, the sudden murder of the
deceased, on the night before the Election
day, not just with a single bullet but with
indiscriminate firing on him and _ his
companions was something that had to be
all over the news and media channels for
weeks to come. The disturbed mental
condition of voters, who were taken aback
to know on the day of the polling that their
chosen candidate was no longer alive, was
a foreseeable and inevitable impact of the
Respondents' action. It was not a sudden
reaction to a provocation that resulted in
the deceased's murder but a premeditated
act, where Respondents found out the
precise location of the deceased on the
very busy night before the Election Day,

Tajamul/Ps* DB: Hon'ble Mr. Justice Syed Arshad All

Hon'ble Mr. Justice Winer Ahmad
{Cr.R No, 56-M of 2019 56-M of 2019 Abdar Vs. The State and another)
Tajemutyrse|

-19-

and got him murdered. It was no doubt, a
message to the general public conveying
the lethal consequences of any opposition
to the murderers”.

However, in Para 18 of the said
judgment, the august Supreme Court has observed
that this Court (the august Supreme Court) cannot
lay down any hard and fast rule while interpreting
section 6 of the Act in order to conclude that which
the cases are triable by the Anti-Terrorism Court as
in many criminal cases facts of the case are also one
of the factors in determining the jurisdiction of a

criminal Court.

17.. In “Ch. Shaukat Ali_V/. Haji Jan

Muhammad and others” (2017 SCMR 533), the
facts of the case were that when after winning the
election the complainant side in a procession were
passing in front of the house of Haji Jan Muhammad
accused where they had an altercation which
resulted into the unfortunate incident wherein
several persons were injured. The august Supreme
Court of Pakistan in Para 9 of the said judgment has
observed that in view of the police report ws 173,
Cr.P.C, prima facie it appears that the altercation
between the parties had occurred all of a sudden

when the procession of the complainant side on

08: Hon’ble Mr, lustice Syed Arshad All

Hon‘ble Mc Justice Wiasr Ahmad
(C2.8 No. 5&-M of 2019 56-M of 2019 Abdar Vs. The State and another)
Tejamut/ess|

-20-

winning the election was passing in front of Dera of
Haji Jan Muhammad and there was no prior
‘object/design’. ©

18. The perusal of the aforesaid case law.
and history of legislation relating to introduction and
promulgation of the Act one can reach at the
conclusion that the purpose and aim of the Act was
to provide a complete mechanism for curbing and
speeding trials of those offences which were
committed either to promote religious hatred or to
create insecurity, horror and terror in the society or a
larger segment thereof or to overawe or intimidate
the government or its agencies. All the acts
mentioned in sub-section (2) of Section 6 of the Act
if committed with design/motive to intimidate the
government, public or a segment of the society or
surrounding circumstances collected by the -
prosecution in the form of evidence which could

suggest that the aforesaid aim is either achieved or

being a by-product of the said terrorist activities; are

to be tried by the special Court being punishable
under section 7 of the Act. Needless to mention that
there might be a number of offences which might.

have the impression of terror in the society, the same

oe: Hon'ble Mr. Justice Syed Arshad All

Hon'ble Mr, Justice Wiaar Ahmad
(CrR No, 56-M of 2019 S6-M of 2019 Abdar Vs. The State and another)
Tajamul/Ps*

ey

-21-

would not attract the penal provision of the Act in
absence of mens rea or surrounding circumstances’
of the case manifesting the mens rea because in such
eventuality even street crimes like snatching of
mobile phones etc. would fall within the purview of
the Act which indeed is not the purpose of the Act. It
would be important to note that u/s 12, the Act has
empowered the Special Court to try other scheduled .
offences, however, the Court will not render any
finding on the same issue as the act complained in
this case is neither a scheduled offence nor the same

is an issue for determination before this Court.

19. In the context of the present case,
committing rape of a teenager aged about 10/11
years within the boundary wall of the house has
neither the element of creating terror in the society
nor the same is an offence under sub-section (2) of
section 6 of the Act, therefore, its trial by the Anti-

Terrorism Court is not warranted.

20. In view of the above discussion, this
revision petition is allowed, the impugned order of
the learned Anti-Terrorism Court is set aside and the

case is transferred u/s 23 of the Act to the learned

DB: Kon’‘ble Mr. Justice Syed Arshad All

Hon’bie Mr, Justice Wigar Ahmad
{CLR No, S&-M of 2019 56M of 2019 Abdar Vs. The State ond another}
de

AN

-22-
Sessions Judge, Swat, for further proceedings in the

case in accordance with law.

Announced, oon
Dt: 15.10.2019 . JUDGE
DGE
Tajamul/Ps* DB: Hon'ble Mr. lustice Syed Arshad Alt

Hen‘ble Mr. Justice Winer Ahmad
{Cr.R No, 56-M of 2019 S6-M of 2019 Abdar Vs. The State and onother}.
