JUDGMENT SHEET
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
PESHAWAR
(Judicial Department)

Eh. Cr.A No. 48/2011 and 50/2011

i) Ajmal Khan Vs. State
ii) Taj Ali Khan Vs. State and another

Date of hearing: 19.12.2017

Appellant(s): (Ajmal Khan) by
Barrister Wagar Ali, Advocate
(Taj Ali Khan) by
Barrister Syed Mudassar. Ameer, Advocate

Respondent(s): (State /NAB) by
Syed Azim Dad, Senior Prosecutor for
NAB

JUDGMENT

ISHTIAQ IBRAHIM, J.- Through this single
judgment we propose to decide this appeal
bearing No. 48/2011 as well as the connected
appeal bearing No. 50/2011 as both these
appeals are arising out of one and the same
judgment dated 16.09.2011 rendered by
learned Accountability Court-IV, Peshawar.

2. - Brief facts of the case are that an
inquiry was initiated by NAB authorities
against Haroon Rashid, Junior Clerk in Health
Department who is son of. appellant Ajmal
Khan. During the course of inquiry it came to
‘light that appellant Ajmal Khan, Accounts

Clerk in Health ‘Department, had been

Ne
ncaa
Tojarutes* | DB Mr. Justice Ikramullah Khan,

Mr, Justice Ishting Ibrahim

En. CrA No. 48P of 2011 Ajmal Khan Vs, State
Tejamutres® |

maintaining different accounts in the names of
his minor sons namely Asif Saleem, Haroon
Rashid and Nasar Jamal as guardian in
National Bank and Habib Bank Lakki Marwat
since 1990 to 1997 wherein many suspicious
transactions had been made. The matter was
further probed by NAB authorities and the
evidence collected during the course of
investigation revealed that the appellant
alongwith co-accused Taj Ali Khan, Junior
Clerk in Health Department, misappropriated
an amount of  Rs.1,99,32,803/- and
Rs.59,00,000/- respectively during the period
from 1995 to 2000. Final report of the
investigation was prepared on the strength of
which Director General, National
Accountability Bureau, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa
sent Reference No.06/2006 to learned
Accountability Court-IV, Peshawar.

3. Initially, appellant Taj Ali Khan
remained absconder and was proceeded
against under Section 512, Cr.P.C by the
learned trial Court. Appellant Ajmal Khan was

formally indicted for the offences to which he

DB Mr. Justice Ikramullah Khan
Mr, Justice Ishtiag Ibrahim

Eh. CrA No. 48-P of 2011 Ajmal Khan Vs, Stste
pleaded not guilty and opted to face the trial.
Prosecution examined 45 PWs in support of
its case whereafter statement of appellant
Ajmal Khan under Section 342, Cr.P.C was
recorded wherein he denied the allegations of
prosecution, however, he did not opt to be
examined on oath. He produced five witnesses
in his defence whose statements were recorded
as DW-1 to DW-5.

4. Appellant Taj Ali was arrested
during the course of recording the defence
witnesses of appellant Ajmal Khan.
Supplementary reference was submitted
against him before the trial Court who charge
sheeted him for the offences but he denied the
charge and claimed the trial. Prosecution
produced 12 witnesses against him and closed
its evidence. During examination of appellant
Taj Ali, he pleaded innocence and asserted
that the allegations of prosecution are false.
He neither recorded his statement on oath in
terms of Section 340(2), Cr.P.C nor wished to

produce evidence in his defence.

Tajamul/PS*

DB Mr, Justice Ikramullah Khan
Mr, Justice Ishtiaq Ibrahim

En. CrA No. 48-P of 2011 Ajmal Khan Vs. State
5. After hearing the arguments, the
learned trial Court vide judgment dated
16.09.2011 convicted and sentenced the
appellants as under:-

1) Appellant Ajmal Khan

He was convicted under
Section 10 of the NAO-1999 and
sentenced to three years R.J with
fine of Rs.200,00,000/-

2) Appellant Taj Ali Khan

(i) He was convicted under Section
10 of the NAO-1999 and
sentenced to one year RJ and a
fine of Rs.60,00,000/-

(ii) He was further convicted under
Section 31-A of the NAO-1999
and sentenced to six months R.I.
It was ordered that both the
sentences shall run concurrently.

Being aggrieved, appellant Ajmal
Khan has challenged his conviction and
sentence through this appeal whereas
appellant Taj Ali Khan has filed the connected

appeal bearing No. 50/2011.

6. Arguments heard and_ record
perused.
Z The record reveals that initially

the trial commenced against appellant Ajmal
Khan and prosecution examined 45 PWs-
whereafter he was examined under Section

342, Cr.P.C. During the course of recording

Tajamnves® | DB Mr. Justice Ikeamullah Khan

Mr. Justice Ishtiaq Ibrahim

Eh. CrA No. 48-P of 2011 Ajmal Khan Vs. State
defence evidence of appellant Ajmal Khan,
the other appellant Taj Ali Khan was arrested
against whom supplementary reference was
submitted before the learned trial Court.
During his trial, prosecution examined 12
PWs and after his examination under Section
342, Cr.P.C, both the appellants were
convicted and sentenced through the same
impugned judgment. Record shows that the
learned trial Court placed reliance on the
evidence already recorded in absence of
appellant Taj Ali Khan which is against the
law. In this regard Section 353, Cr.P.C is
relevant which is reproduced for convinience.

353. Evidence to be taken in presence
of accused. Except as otherwise
expressly provided, all evidence taken
under Chapters XX, XXI, XXII and
XXIIA shall be taken in the presence of
the accused, or, when his personal
attendance is dispensed with, in presence
of his pleader.

The record reveals that the point
was raised before the trial Court as to whether
the prosecution is bound to produce the entire
PWs or the witnesses nominated in the
Supplementary Reference filed against

appellant Taj Ali. The learned trial Court vide

Tajamul/PS*

DB Mr. Justice Ikramullah Khan
Mr. Justice Ishting Ibrahim

Eh. CrA No. 48-P of 2011 Ajmal Khan Vs. State
order dated 25.04.2011 held that the safe and
convenient way will be that of allowing the
prosecution to conclude its evidence in the
supplementary Reference against the accused
Taj Ali Khan and thereafter the the remaining
proceedings be clubbed with that of appellant
Ajmal Khan. As such, only the statements of
12 PWs were recorded in the supplementary
Reference and the evidence already recorded
in absence of appellant Taj Ali Khan was
considered without recording the statements of
those witnesses in his presence who had
already been examined during the trial of
appellant Ajmal Khan. In impugned
conviction on the basis of such evidence is not
legal. Even if an accused or his counsel gives
consent to rely upon the previous evidence
recorded in his absence even then consent of a
party or his counsel does not confer any
jurisdiction upon the Court nor anything
illegal can be legalized with the consent so
given by parties. Even otherwise when co-
accused is arrested subsequently then they are

to be charged/indicted jointly and thereafter

Tajamuves® | DB Mr. Justice Ikramullah Khan
Mr. Justice Ishtiag Ibrahim

Eh. GrA No. 48-P of 2011 Ajmal Khan Vs. State
trial is to be carried out because both of them
are accused in one and the same
case/reference.

8. Admittedly, the learned trial
Court has neither given an opportunity to
appellant Taj Ali Khan of cross examining the
witnesses who were examined in his absence
except the IO nor framed a fresh charge
against the appellant Ajmal Khan on
commencement of the trial against appellant
Taj Ali. The safe and proper course for the
learned trial Court was either to pronounce
judgment against appellant Ajmal Khan on
conclusion of the trial against him or to have
charged both the appellants afresh for de novo
trial but the learned trial Court did not adopt
either of the mentioned two alternatives, as
such, an illegality was committed. Reliance in
this regard is placed on the judgment in the
case titled “Bahadur _Sher_and_ another Vs.
The State” (1992 PCr.LJ 378) wherein it is
held that:-

8. In the instant case, as stated earlier,
Shahab Gul appellant was charged by
Mr. Abdul Wahid Seth on 3-4-1988

Tajamul/PS*

DB Mr. Justice Ikramullah Khan
Mr, Justice Ishtiag Ibrahim

Eh. Cr.A No. 48-P of 2011 Ajmal Khan Vs. State
trial Court has become imperative. Therefore,

this appeal No.48/2011 and the connected

trial Court with directions to frame fresh

proceed with the case in accordance with law

when his co-accused Bahadur Sher was
absconding. He examined 8
prosecution witnesses when the
prosecution case was closed on
1-8-1988. In the meantime, in
consequence of retirement of Mr.
Abdul Wahid Seth, Mr. Jawaid Nawaz
Gandapur took cognizance and he
charged Bahadur Sher appellant alone
on 1-10-1958 and re examined 9
witnesses and the prosecution case was
closed. It is queer to note that when the
trial of Bahadur Sher appellant
commenced his co-accused Shahab Gul
was not charged afresh. Since the trial
of Shahab Gul appellant had
concluded, then either after examining
him under section 342, Cr.P.C., and
recording defence evidence, if any, the
learned trial Judge should have
pronounced the judgment against him.
In the alternative, the learned trial
Judge should have charged both the
appellants afresh and trial de novo
conducted against them and
pronounced the judgment. The learned
trial Judge did not adopt either of the
two alternatives and in consequence,
an illegality of vital importance had
crept in whereby the appellants have
been prejudiced in their defence”.

In the backdrop of the above

discussion, remand of the case to the learned

appeal No. 50/2011 are allowed, conviction
and sentence of both the appellants are set

aside and the case is remanded to the learned

charge against the appellants and thereafter

Tajamulps* |

DB Mr. Justice Ikramullah Khan
Mr. Justice Ishtiaq Ibrahim

En. GrA No, 48-P of 2011 Ajmal Khan Vs, State
by examining the prosecution witnesses.
Appellants are directed to submit bail bonds to
the tune of Rs.2,00,000/- (two lac) each with
two sureties each in the like amount to the
satisfaction of the learned trial Court when
they are summoned by the learned trial Court.
Needless to mention that the trial Court shall
conclude the trial as early as possible.

Announced
19.12.2017 a

JUDGE

a ,

Tajamul/PS*

DB Mr. Justice Ikramullah Khan
Mr. Justice Ishtiag Ibrahim

Eh. Cr.A No. 48-P of 2011 Ajmal Khan Vs. State
