JUDGMENT SHEET

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
BANNU BENCH.

(Judicial Department)

BCA No.94-B of 2017
Malik Zafrullah

Vs
The State and another.

JUDGMENT

Date of hearing 31.01.2019

Appellant-Petitioner: By__Pir _Liagat__Ali__ Shah,
Advocate.

Respondent : By Anwar-ul-Hag & Fagir Mehboob-
ul-Hameed Advocate.

State B udrat Ullah Khan, AAG.

MUHAMMAD NASIR MAHFOOZ, J.---_ The Petitioner

seeks cancellation of bail granting order dated 14.11.2017,

passed by learned Additional Sessions Judge-III, Lakki Marwat,

whereby accused/ respondent Murad Ali, involved in case F.I.R

No. 527 dated 09.08.2015 under sections 302/324/34 P.P.C,

Police Station, Lakki Marwat, was admitted to bail on statutory

ground.

*Azam Khan/P.S* (S.B) Mr. Justice Muhammad Nasir Mahfooz.
-2-

2. I have heard arguments of learned counsel

for the parties and perused the record. The judgments cited at

the bar are distinguishable.

3. Perusal of record reveals that bail of

accused/ respondent Murad Ali has been dismissed on merits up

to this Court and his further bail application before apex court

has been dismissed as withdrawn vide order dated 7.03.2016,

therefore, on merits he was not entitled to the concession of

bail. Plethora of case law could be cited for and against the

grant and cancellation of bail, but the logic of words has to

yield to the logic of realities. What has prevented the I.O from

appearing in Court seems to be shrouded in mystery.

4. Accused/ respondent applied for post arrest

bail before the learned trial Court/ Additional Sessions Judge-

IH, Lakki Marwat, on ground of statutory delay in conclusion

of trial, which was granted vide impugned order. Eleven

prosecution witnesses have been examined, while statement of

single PW Investigation Officer of the case is yet to be recorded

and at this stage release of accused would definitely prejudice

the prosecution case. If this bail had not been granted the trial

*Azam Khan/P.S* (S.B) Mr. Justice Muhammad Nasir Mahfooz.
-3-

would have concluded by now. The delay in conclusion of the

trial has been occasioned due to submission of successive bail

applications by the accused/ respondent and fresh investigation

on his request. Trial Court has made consistent efforts to

procure attendance of the ILO even some coercive measures

have been adopted. The ground mentioned that the IO is not

attending the Court and he has developed some grudges against

the accused party is poignant reminder of ineffectiveness on

part of trial court. The grant of bail on statutory delay could

have been protected in case the respondent had not been denied

bail after arrest by this court on 11.12.2015 in BA No.291-B of

2015. Para No.7 is quoted below.

“This court, while confirming bail before
arrest of the co-accused in the same case
has already given its findings on merits of
the case, in regard to the petition in hand.
In case in hand, one young innocent person
has been murdered, while the other one was
seriously injured and the petitioner has
been attributed specific role of firing at the
deceased. The medical as well as rest of the
circumstantial evidence and ocular eye

witness accounts of two persons, supports

*Azam Khan/P.S* (S.B) Mr. Justice Muhammad Nasir Mahfooz.
-4-

and prima facie corroborate the prosecution
version. Keeping in view, the evidence so far
collected by the investigating agency, prima
facie connect the petitioner with the
commission of the offence of “Qatl-e-Amd”
» Which entails, capital punishment,
squarely falls within prohibitory clause of
section 497 Cr.PC.”

4. The delay caused in the trial of accused is

equally on the part of prosecution and the accused as well.

Charge is framed on 17.09.2016, but on the application of

respondent for post arrest bail submitted on 17.08.2016, order

was passed on 19.09.2016 by learned trial Court, while this

court had earlier dealt with previous bail application. On

25.10.2017 again a fresh bail application on statutory delay was

filed, which was allowed on 14.11.2017 after consuming two

months. This bail cancellation application has consumed about

14 months after it was submitted on 24.11.2017. The robust

interpretation of facts of each case must be aimed to suppress

the mischief but advancing remedy so that justice should not

only be done but should be seen to have been done.

5. Bail to an accused on completion of

statutory period in conclusion of trial could only be granted

*Azam Khan/P.S* (S.B) Mr. Justice Muhammad Nasir Mahfooz.
-5-

when there is no prospect of completion of trial in near future,

while in the instant case trial is almost complete, hence, learned

trial court has erred in law by granting same concession in

favour of accused/ respondent. Though after three years

absconsion of co-accused Taj Ali, trial may commence afresh.

6. For what has been discussed above, this

petition is allowed, impugned order of learned lower court is

recalled and bail of respondent is cancelled. As a consequence

whereof, he is taken into custody and be sent to judicial lockup.

However, learned trial court is directed to conclude the trial

within a period of four months positively. Parties are expected

to regularly attend the Court.

Announced.
31.01.2019

JUDGE

*Azam Khan/P.S* (S.B) Mr. Justice Muhammad Nasir Mahfooz.
