JUDGMENT SHEET

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, PESHAWAR

JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT

Quashment Petition No.99-P/2017

JUDGMENT
Date of hearing: : 30% March, 2018
Petitioner(Biradar Khan) By: Mr. Alam Khan,
Advocate.
Respondents.
State By: Syed Sikandar Hayat Shah,
AAG.
Naeemullah etc. By: Mr. Asfand Yar, advocate

QAISER RASHID KHAN, J:- Through the petition in
hand, the petitioner has called in question the judgment and order
dated 13.7.2017 and 4.12.2017 of the learned Judicial Magistrate,
Katlang and learned Additional Sessions Judge-VI, Mardan
respectively, whereby the request of the petitioner for return of

the vehicle on superdari was declined.

2. All that the learned counsel for the petitioner
vehemently contends that he has duly purchased the vehicle from

the respondent No.2, namely Naeemullah after payment of due

M.Ishaq Shah,PS. Justice Qaiser Rashid Khan
consideration who in turn committed to hand over the transfer

letter and the registration book of the vehicle but then he backed

out from his commitment which prompted the petitioner to

approach the local Nazim for getting the documents of the car,

whereafter a Jirga was nominated who in turn handed over the

car to the local police, vide Mad No.25, dated 27.5.2017 and the

latter took its custody under Section 523/550 Cr.P.C. The learned

counsel for the petitioner thus urges that the petitioner is the

bonafide purchaser, owner and last possessor of the vehicle and

then the police has also held the petitioner entitled to the same

and more so that the vehicle is not a stolen one and that the rival

claimant has not approached this court for its return, therefore, he

is entitled to retain the same on superdari.

3. Such submissions of the learned counsel for the

petitioner are resisted by the learned AAG assisted by the learned

counsel for the respondents No.2 and 3 who contend that the

ownership of the vehicle is still in dispute.

4. Arguments heard and the available record perused.

M.Ishaq Shah,PS. Justice Qaiser Rashid Khan
5. In the present case, the petitioner lays claim to the

vehicle on the basis of his purchase from respondent No.1,

namely Naeemullah but the latter did not keep his word to hand

over the registration book of the vehicle to the petitioner and that

is how, the petitioner tried to seek the help of the local Nazim

whereafter the Jirga handed over the vehicle to the local police,

vide Mad No.25, dated 27.5.2017 and accordingly it was taken

over by the police vide Mad No.31, dated 4.6.2017 under Section

523/550 Cr.P.C.

Whereas the petitioner has annexed a copy of the

certificate of registration of the vehicle bearing No. LEA-06-

3132 with his petition which shows that initially its registered

owner was Faisal Bank Limited and then it changed hands when

it was transferred to one Tahir Javed S/O Chaudhry Muhammad

Jameel and onward to Tahir Ghulam Muhammad S/O Ghulam

Muhammad. During the course of submissions, the learned

counsel for the respondents No.2 and 3 produced a T.O.Form

duly attested by the Motor Registering Authority, Lahore,

M.Ishaq Shah,PS. Justice Qaiser Rashid Khan
showing transfer of the vehicle by Tahir Ghulam Muhammad in

the name of Khan-ur-Rehman whereafter he appears to have

registered the vehicle in his name as the original registration

book was also produced during arguments. Copies of the said

documents are placed on file. The learned AAG also produced a

photo copy of F.ILR. No. 1274, dated 19.12.2017 of P.S.

Timergara, Dir Lower lodged by the said Khan-ur-Rehman

against respondents No.2 and 3 for having defrauded him in

respect of his vehicle.

6. All these circumstances have made confusion

confounded so far as the real owner and last possessor of the

vehicle is concerned and its ultimate fate can only be decided by

the competent court after recording evidence. Thus request of the

petitioner for the grant of vehicle on superdari cannot be acceded

to at this stage and this petition accordingly stands dismissed.

Announced on
30th March, 2018

JUDGE

M.Ishaq Shah,PS. Justice Qaiser Rashid Khan
