-l-
JUDGMENT SHEET
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,

MINGORA BENCH (DAR-UL-QAZA), SWAT
(Judicial Department)

C.R No. 443-M/2013
Mst. Bakht Sahiba and others..............(Petitioners)
vs
Malak Zada and Other........cccccesee (Respondents)

Present: Mr. Shah Rawan Khan, Advocate for’ the
petitioners.

Mr. Rahman Ali Khan, Advocate for the
respondents No. 1 to 10.

Date of hearing: 26.02.2024
JUDGMENT

SHAHID KHAN, J.- The petitioners have called in
question the judgment & decree of the learned
Additional District Judge, Matta, Swat, dated
19.06.2013, whereby, their appeal was dismissed, and
consequently, the judgment & decree, dated
29.1 1.2012, of the learned Civil Judge-I, Matta, Swat,
in respect of the subject property, detailed in the

headnote of the plaint, was maintained.

2. In essence, the petitioners/plaintiffs
approached the learned trial Court through a J/is for
declaration coupled with permanent injunction and

possession to the effect that the subject property,

Abdul Sabooh (S.B.) Hon’ble Mr, Justice Shahid Khan

, -2-
detailed in the headnote of the plaint, is the legacy of

their grand predecessor, Ayaz Khan, wherein, they,
being the descendants of Ghulam Nabi, are entitled to
their respective shari shares and that the respondents/
defendants have no right whatsoever to deny it or enter
it in their names in the revenue record. It was contested

by the respondents/defendants through their written

statements. After recording evidence, far & against

followed by hearing of learned counsel for the parties,
initially, the claim of petitioners/plaintiffs was allowed
by the learned trial Court vide judgment & decree,
dated 18.11.2011. However, after remand by the
learned appellate Court through judgment/order, dated
19.06.2012, it was dismissed. by the learned trail Court
vide judgment & decree, dated 29.11.2012, followed
by the judgment & decree of the learned appellate
Court, dated 19.06.2013, hence, the subject Revision

Petition.

3. Arguments of learned counsel for the

parties have been heard and the record scanned through

with their valuable assistance.

4. The record made available before this

Court would divulge that the petitioners/plaintiffs are

Abdul Sabooh (S.B.) Hon’ble Mr. Justice Shahid Khan
3-

claiming their due shares in the legacy of their grand
predecessor, Ayaz Khan. Their contention is that at
the time of settlement in the area, the respondents/
defendants No. 1 & 2 with collusion of other
defendants and to deprive the petitioners/plaintiffs
from their due shares, have recorded less property in
the name of their predecessor, Ghulam Nabi, in the
revenue record. As such, they are claiming their due
shares in the subject property through _ their
predecessor, Ghulam Nabi. In support of their
contentions, petitioner/plaintiff No. 2 himself appeared
as PW-1, who was also special attorney for rest of the
petitioners/plaintiffs. He produced five other witnesses
as PWs-2 to 6. In his examination-in-chief, PW-1
reiterated the contentions as taken in the plaint,
however, in his cross-examination, he stated that
Ghulam Nabi, predecessor-in-title of the parties, and
Israil were brothers inter-se and their due shares had
already been transferred in their names, but same was
not entered in the revenue record. At the same breath,
he stated that less shares had been recorded in their
names in the revenue record. He also stated that their
predecessor-in-title, Ghulam Nabi, died in April, 2001.

He made the following admissions:

Abdul Sabooh (S.B.} Hon’ble Mr. Justice Shahid Khan
-4.
SUI LG pub shold eK os Se OB"
oe le AGG eI LL hae
II MS eg BA HE LP Md pF s0sld
Arch Bel gf Ogee L fps Lotick
é1 Ua Ss Sne pie Sot SUS ae E
Lob Puch e fb SUA BLL pe fol4
Ara SSE caer dpi Ee nah
ie Lod wi he a Lp Seng Als
SOFN MB ee Bs SRBTWGES SE #1 ash
af Pde See ng Bs Cu Et Srl
Soret Loliekeli hese CiGie og ru
FIBA i wifi hee evar hig
1995 See xvu tt Eiji cre Hoses

eho oth £ wld e% a ash f pi (Ft ee Ut
AP wb Secrg nee Lio

ML ole slick sto fer L suey
Sg BPE Ge Sedo
MA KEPLY pli OY pheliete
eid tvs rebut l peoleeutE liek
Lb mes Leu SAS pa SPU”
Lb Sete AGI untoptL gle
SF Bt b fer i tin pedbouitetn
SIR assist SSG eteitey® LNG F iF

"BES ste botth

Patwari Halqa appeared as PW-5, who
produced certain revenue record. In the very first line
of his cross-examination on behalf of the respondents/
defendants No. 1 to 8 & 10, he stated that at the time

of death of predecessor-in-title of the parties, Ghulam

Abdul Sabooh (S.B.) Hon’ble Mr. Justice Shahid Khan
-5-

Nabi, he had left no legacy as per the revenue record.

He admitted that:

Sole ie SE pe Ae Lh Se een g"
Sule wie GiyLuriF bbl top
SHEL XO Sri ch srii theo Ld Fieseb ot

5, From evidence of the petitioners/
plaintiffs, it is crystal clear that their predecessor-in-
title, Ghulam Nabi, had transferred all his share in the
legacy in favour of his two sons, Malak Zada and
Bakht Zada (respondents/defendants No. 1 & 2) on the
basis of certain suits, which ended through
compromise effected between the parties. As such, he
had left no legacy, which could be claimed by the
petitioners/plaintiffs in the subject suit. Though, their
contention is that certain properties had been entered in
the name of their predecessor-in-title but the same
were less than his due share. Whatever his share was,
less or otherwise, he had to approach the civil Court
for his due share in the legacy in his lifetime, but the
petitioners/plaintiffs have no locus standi to claim that
less share was recorded in his name and that too, after
his death. Moreso, there is nothing on the face of

record, which could: show that predecessor-in-title of

Abdul Sabooh (S.B.) Hon’ble Mr. Justice Shahid Khan
-6-
the parties, Ghulam Nabi, had left any legacy. The fact

that predecessor-in-title of the parties had left no
legacy, has also been admitted by PW-S5 in his cross-
examination in a manner that though predecessor-in-
title of the parties, in his lifetime, was in possession of
his due share but he had transferred it in favour of the
contesting respondents/defendants (Malak Zada &
Bakht Zada) on the basis of certain compromise/civil
suits and also admitted their ownership in respect

thereof.

6. It is also on the face of record that prior to.
institution of the subject suit, the petitioners/plaintiffs
had also filed a suit in the year 1999 against their
predecessor-in-title and the respondents/defendants
No. 1 & 2, which they could not pursue and thus, it
was dismissed for non-prosecution.. Copy of the
aforesaid plaint is available on file, which speaks loud
& clear that the property, disputed therein, is part &
parcel of the subject matter, however, in that suit, they
only claim their due shares from their predecessor-in-
title and the respondents/defendants No. 1 & 2 but in

the subject suit, they included all the legacy of their

grand predecessor, Ayaz Khan, and claimed their due

Abdul Sabooh . (S.B.) Hon’ble Mr. Justice Shahid Khan
S.

-7-

shares through their predecessor-in-title, Ghulam Nabi.
As such, they are precluded from filing the subject suit
and that too, after the death of their predecessor-in-
title, thus, the issue in this regard has rightly been

appreciated by both the Courts below.

7. To conclude, it is observed that the
learned trial .Court coupled with the learned appellate
Court, in. view of proper appraisal of the facts &
circumstances. and the evidence so recorded, have
arrived at the just conclusion of the matter in issue, as
such, the impugned concurrent findings of the learned
Courts below do not need any interference. Reliance is
placed on the case of Nasir _Ali_v. Muhammad
Asghar reported as 2022 SCMR 1054, wherein the

Hon’ble Apex Court has held:

"Section 115, C.P.C empowers and mete
out the High Court to satisfy and reassure
itself that the order of the subordinate
Court is within its jurisdiction; the case is
one in which the Court ought to exercise
jurisdiction and in exercising jurisdiction,
the Court has not acted illegally or-in
breach of some provision of law or with
material irregularity or by committing
some error of procedure in the course of
the trial which affected the ultimate
decision. If the High Court is satisfied
that aforesaid principles have not been
unheeded or disregarded by the Courts
below, it has no power to interfere in the
conclusion of the subordinate Court upon
questions of fact or law. The scope of

Abdul Sabooh (S.B.) Hon’ble Mr, Justice Shahid Khan
-8-

revisional jurisdiction is limited to the
extent of misreading or non-reading of
evidence, jurisdictional error or an
illegality of the nature in the judgment
which may have material effect on the
result of the case or if the conclusion
drawn therein is perverse or conflicting to
the law. Furthermore, the High Court has
very limited jurisdiction to interfere in
the concurrent conclusions arrived at by
the courts below while exercising power
under section 115, C.P.C."

Similarly, in the case of Salamat_ Ali

and others v. Muhammad Din and others reported

as PLD 2022 Supreme Court 353, it was observed:

"A revisional Court cannot upset a
finding of fact of the Court(s) below
unless that finding is the result of
misreading, non-reading, or perverse or
absurd appraisal of some material
evidence. The revisional Court cannot
substitute the finding of the Court(s)
below with its own merely for the reason
that it finds its own finding more
plausible than that of the Court(s)
below."

In para-6 of the judgment rendered in the

case of Muhammad Sarwar and others v. Hashmal

Khan and others reported as PLD 2022 Supreme

Court 13, it was also held that:

"It is well settled exposition of law,
deducible from plethora of dictums laid
down by superior Courts that section 115,
C.P.C. empowers and meted out the High
Court to satisfy and reassure itself that
the order of the subordinate court is
within its jurisdiction; the case is one in
which the Court ought to exercise

Abdul Sabooh (S.B,) Hon’ble Mr. Justice Shahid Khan
-9-

jurisdiction and in exercising jurisdiction,
the Court has not acted illegally or in
breach of some provision of law or with
material irregularity or by committing
some error of procedure in the course of
the trial which affected the ultimate
decision. If the High Court is satisfied
that aforesaid principles have not been
unheeded or disregarded by the Courts
below, it has no power to interfere in the
conclusion of the subordinate Court upon
questions of fact or law."

In Khudadad y. Syed Ghazanfar_Ali

Shah alias S. Inaam Hussain and others reported as

2002 SCMR 933, the Hon’ble Apex Court has held
that the High Court has a narrow and limited
jurisdiction to interfere in the concurrent rulings
arrived at by the Courts below while exercising
power under section 115, C.P.C. Relevant findings of

the august Court are reproduced as under:

"The High Court has a narrow and
limited jurisdiction to interfere in the
concurrent rulings arrived at by the
Courts below while exercising power
under section 115, C.P.C. These powers
have been entrusted and consigned to the
High Court in order to secure effective
exercise of its superintendence and
visitorial powers of correction
unhindered by _ technicalities which
cannot be invoked against conclusion of
law or fact which do not in any way affect
the jurisdiction of the court but confined
to the extent of misreading or non-
reading of evidence, jurisdictional error
or an illegality of the nature in the
judgment which may have material effect
on the result of the case or the conclusion
drawn therein is perverse or contrary to

Abdul Sabooh (S.B.) Hon’ble Mr. Justice Shahid Khan
ons |

2frert Abdul Sabooh

fh

-10-

the law, but interference for the mere fact
that the appraisal of evidence may
suggest another view of the matter is not
possible in revisional jurisdiction,
therefore, the scope of the appellate and
revisional jurisdiction must not be mixed
up or bewildered."

8. For the reasons stated hereinabove, the
subject Revision Petition is devoid of any ‘merit, as

such, it is hereby dismissed.

Announced :
Dt: 26.02.2024 j =

(S.B.) Hon’ble Mr. Justice Shahid Khan
