JUDGEMENT SHEET

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, BANNU BENCH
[Judicial Department}

CR. No. 96-B/2015
Noor Shah Ali Khan alias Nawarish Ali Khan deceased through legal
heirs Caste Pathan resident of Bega Taja Zai Tehsil and District Lakki
Marwat.

versus

Khan Momin 06 others Caste Pathan resident of Bega Taja Zai Tehsil
and District Lakki Marwat.
Date of hearing: 02.02.2022

For petitioners: Messrs. Haji Zafar Iqbal & Aslam Khan Michen
Khel, Advocates.

For respondents: Messrs. Faqir Mehbub-ul-Hameed and Kazim Raza,
Advocates.

JUDGEMENT
MUHAMMAD NAEEM ANWAR, J.- Petitioner has challenged
the judgment and decree of learned Additional District Judge,
Lakki Marwat dated 19.06.2015, whereby the appeal filed by the
petitioner was dismissed, consequently the judgment and decree of
the learned Civil Judge-II, Lakki Marwat dated 06.07.2013 was

maintained.

02. Significant facts of the instant petition are that predecessor
of respondents has filed a suit civil for declaration in the year
2011 against the petitioner/defendant for declaration to the effect
that she has been entered as owner being daughter of Mir Salam in
the property located in Khata Nos. 162, 164 to 166, 1260 etc in the
revenue Estate of Moza Manji Wala Tehsil Naurang District Lakki
Marwat according to Jamabandi for the year 1965 and property
situated in Khata No. 34 to 40, 46 & 47 in the revenue Estate of
Moza Bega Tajzai Tehsil and District Lakki Marwat according to

Jamabandi for the year 1977-78; that petitioner/defendant
fraudulently got entered and attested gift mutation No.2385 dated
08.07.1965 and mutation No. 3961 dated 15.12.1977 in the above
mentioned Mozajaat as such transferred her ownership in his
name, therefore, both the mutations being based on fraud and
collusion are ineffective upon her right and liable to be cancelled.
An added prayer for perpetual and mandatory injunction to the
effect that the defendant be restrained from claiming ownership
the extent of shares of plaintiff as detailed in Para-A of the plaint.
It was averred in the plaint that the plaintiff and defendant being
real brother and sister, the plaintiff alienated her property situated
in the Moza Landiwa willingly in favour of defendant through gift
mutation No.41259 dated 15.02.1978; that beyond the above said
property plaintiff has also got sufficient property in Moza
Manjiwala and Moza Bega Tajazai; that the suit property was
cultivated by the defendant who used to give due share of produce
to plaintiff but since 04 years, defendant paid nothing to plaintiff
and about one week prior to institution of the suit plaintiff was
informed by her son namely, Momin Khan that the property of
plaintiff situated in Moza Manjiwala and Moza Tajzai were
transferred by the defendant through impugned mutations, thus,
defendant was asked for transfer of her property in her name but
proved as futile exercise hence, the suit was filed. Suit was
contested through filing written statement by the
petitioner/defendant on 02.03.2011 by denying the allegations of
plaint. On conclusion of evidence learned trial court through
judgment and decree dated 06.07.2013 decreed the suit

respondent/plaintiff, being aggrieved petitioner has filed an appeal
which was dismissed on 19.05.2015, thus, the concurrent findings
of both the courts below have been assailed by the defendant

through the instant petition.

03. Learned counsel for petitioner contended that description of
the property with reference to correct particulars of two revenue
estates Manjiwala and Bega Tajazai of District Lakki Marwat were
not mentioned. Similarly, the particulars of fraud were not given in
the plaint which were to be proved by the plaintiff as required
under Order VI Rule 4 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. He
added that possession of the property has been handed-over to the
petitioner since the date of attestation of mutation and in such
circumstances on one hand suit of plaintiffs/respondents was time-
barred and on the other hand they were required to prove illegality
of mutations as the suit was to be proved by the plaintiff in
accordance with Article 126 of the Qanun-e-Shahdat Order, 1984.
He also submitted that once the possession was transferred and
supported by the entries of revenue papers strong presumption of
truth is attached to the revenue papers even otherwise the mutation
carries an unrebutted presumption being 30 years old documents in
consonance with Article 100 of Qanun-e-Shahdat Order, 1984. In
order to fortify his submissions, he placed reliance on 2011 CLC
989, 2009 SCMR 598, PLD 2019 Peshawar 202, 2008 CLC 1426

and PLD 2020 SC 338.

04. Contrarily, learned counsel for respondents contended that
the respondents had owned properties in three revenue estates, i.e.,

Landaki, Bega Tajazai and Manjiwala wherefrom to the extent of
Landaki the property was not only transferred but it is also an
admitted position as such that was not challenged however, to the
extent of Bega Tajazai and Manjiwala respondents have never
transferred their property in favour of their brothers; that plaint
sans the particulars of gift, venue of alleged offer, acceptance and
delivery of possession which were not only to be mentioned in the
plaint but was also required to be proved. He added that entries of
revenue papers were based upon illegal mutations bearing No.
3885 dated 08.07.1965 and 3961 dated 15.12.1977 but when sole
witness of petitioner/defendant entered into the witness box he
narrated a different story which version find no support either from
record or from entries of illegal mutations; that the
petitioner/defendant being beneficiary of the property were
required to prove the correctness, validity and authenticity of
mutations but they have failed; that during pending adjudication
finger prints of disputed mutations along with admitted finger
prints were sent to Forensic Expert and after receipt of report
which too was not supporting the stance of defendant/petitioner,
the respondent/plaintiff submitted an application that expert should
be examined but their application was hotly resisted and ultimately
it was dismissed on 26.03.2003; lastly, that the
petitioner/defendant, as per their statement alleged that as per
“Riwaj” of the locality the property was got mutated in their names
but no such “Riwaj” exists in the area and if any it was required to
be proved by them. In support of his submissions, he placed
reliance on 2017 SCMR 1110, NLR 2008 (Rev:) 97, 2016 SCMR

862, 2016 SCMR 1417, 2017 YLR 2248, 2016 SCMR 662, 2013
SCMR 168, 2017 SCMR 402, 2012 SCMR 1373, 2016 CLC 43

and NLR 2011 (Civil) 01.
05. Arguments heard; record perused.

06. It is reflected from record that Mir Salam was predecessor
in interest of both the parties, the plaintiff Mst. Nawab Khela was
the daughter and Noor Shah Ali Khan alias Nawarish Ali was the
son. The disputed property was devolved upon the legal heirs of
Mir Salam and through disputed mutations No. 3885 of the
revenue estate of Manjiwala and mutation No. 3961 of the revenue
estate of Bega Tajazai it was mutated in favour of
defendant/petitioner, Ex.PW-5/1 is mutation No. 3885 which
reveals that Mst. Nawar Khela was identified by one Haji Nawab
Khan son of Imam Shah and Sultan son of Bakhmal and record
reflects that at the time of attestation of mutation she was not only
married, had her husband and sons as well and this fact was
admitted by Noor Shah Ali Khan alias Nawarish Ali Khan who
also admitted that Mst. Nawar Khela was “Parda’” observing lady.
Defendant/petitioner produced Mst. Behram Khela the daughter of
Mir Salam, the sister of Mst. Nawar Khela/plaintiff in order to
prove the correctness/sanctity of mutation who deposed that only
their brother Noor Shah Ali Khan alias Nawarish Ali Khan was
present and nothing else when she thumb impressed the mutation.
She categorically replied to a question that Haji Nawab Ali Khan
son of Imam Shah and Sultan son of Bakhmal were not known to
her and similarly she too was not known to them. Son of petitioner

Muhammad Ghulam also appeared as DW-3 in order to depose
that Mir Mast son of Sir Mast, Ghulam Khan Lumberdar and Sher
Nawaz Khan son of Abdullah Khan were dead as such they could
not be produced however, in cross-examination, he replied to a
question that neither this fact was mentioned in the written
statement nor he is in possession of death certificates of referred to
above alleged witnesses and that he could not produce Secretary

Union Council to corroborate his stance.

07. It appears from record that when the disputed thumb
impression on mutation and admitted thumb impression of Mst.
Nawar Khela were sent for Forensic Expert, it was reported “the

impression now mark-Q on the aforesaid mutation is too faint and

bears_no_ identifiable data for_examination/comparison purposes
hence_no_ definite opinion can be given on it.” In such an

eventuality when the alleged witnesses were not before the Court,
thumb impression was not compared as correct, the alleged donor
was not identified by her husband and sons, the ingredients of
alleged gift were neither mentioned in the written statement nor
elaborated in the evidence of petitioner/defendant, fact of offer of
alleged gift, its acceptance, transfer of possession were not proved
and the alleged “Riwaj” has not been supported by any one. During
the course of arguments, learned counsel for petitioner Hajai Zafar
Iqbal was questioned about the transfer of the property of two
revenue estates as to whether the entire property was mutated or
any share therefrom, he stated at the bar that the entire property of
revenue estate of Manjiwala and Bega Tajazai has been transferred

through disputed mutations. In the case titled “Muhammad
Asghar and others Vs, Hakam Bibi through L. Rs and others”
(2015 CLC 719(Lahore)) it was held that:

“In this regard it is important to note that no time, date or place with
regard to the offer of gift, its acceptance or delivery of possession is
mentioned in the written statement or in the testimony of the said
witness. Even in Rapt Roznamcha Wagiati (Exh.D-1) there is no
mention about any date of offer of gift its acceptance or delivery of
possession by the donor to the donee.”

Reliance is also placed on judgment of Hon’ble Supreme Court in
case titled “Khushi Muhammad Vs Liaquat Ali” (PLJ_2003 SC

28) and “Mst. Kalsoom Bibi and another Vs Muhammad Arif
and others” (2005 SCMR 135) which reads as under:

“It is a matter of record that the deed as such is challenged on
grounds of conspiracy, fakeness and forgery amounting to fraud.
In these circumstances, the beneficiary under the document is
bound not only to prove the execution of document but also to
prove the, actual factum of gift by falling back on the three
ingredients of proposal, acceptance and delivery of possession.
These have to be proved independent of the document. This
Court has quite recently held in case of Ghulam Haider 2003
SCMR 1829 that essentials of a valid gift were required to be
proved independent of the deed even if it was registered, in case
it is challenged on grounds of forgery etc. Keeping in view the
principle so enunciated, we are clear in our mind that the
defendants have not produced an iota of evidence to prove the
original factum of gift; the proposal, the acceptance and the
delivery of possession. We have already discussed that the
possession under the gift has not been delivered at all. The gift
can be declared void on this score alone arid as well.

In the instant case it is a gift which tantamount to disinheriting
the closest of the legal heirs or, even if genuine, it otherwise
practically disinherits the legal heirs. In such given
circumstances, when, through a gift, deprivation of legal heirs is
involved, either intended or unintended, the burden to prove
original transaction of gift with all its ingredients strongly rests,
upon the beneficiaries of such gift. This Court, in similar
circumstances, had nullified a transaction of gift in case of
Muhammad Ashraf 1989 SCMR 1390, where the question arose
as to why in the presence of legal heirs, particularly the children,
the donor would have gifted out the entire land to a nephew.
Quite recently in case of Barkat Ali 2002 SCMR 1938, this Court
once again reiterated such principle holding that in cases of gifts,
resulting into disinheriting of the legal heirs, the burden to prove
original transaction of gift squarely rests upon the donees Such
burden has not been touched at all, much less proved.
The petitioner has miserably failed to prove the gift of

property in his favour by predecessor in interest of respondents.

08. Furthermore, Mere 30 years age of a document would
not provide any justification for its proof unless the document
is proved in accordance with Article 79 of Qanoon-e-Shahadat
Order, 1984, when it was questioned. The sole ground that the
age of the document is 30 years would not be taken as gospel
truth, when the genuineness of the document is disputed, it the
duty of the Court to determine the question of its genuineness
and correctness because age of the document alone would not
amount to be a proof about the correct contents of such
document. If genuineness of a document was susceptible to
suspicion the Court could refuse to raise presumption and
could ask for the proof of its contents. Wisdom is drawn from
the principle enunciated in the case of “Ch. Muhammad
Shafi vs. Shamim Khanum” (2007 SCMR 838). The Hon’ble

Supreme court has held that:

“Tt is settled law that ‘presumption qua thirty years old document
under Article 100 of Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984 is
permissive and not imperative. The Court must consider the
evidence of the documents, in order to enable it to decide
whether in any specific case it should or should not presume
proper signature and execution. It is settled law that the Court
should be very careful about raising any presumption under
Article 100 in favour of old documents specially when the same
are produced during the trial of suits in which under proprietary
rights are set up on the basis of such documents/deeds. It is also
settled law that the Court may refuse to apply the presumption
where evidence in proof the document is available, or where the
evidence has produced and disbelieved”.
Reference can also be on Muhammad Naseem

Fatima’s case (PLD 2005 Supreme Court 455).

09. True, a woman can transfer her share to any one and
transfer made by her cannot be questioned unless she herself
disputes, in the instant matter, it was Mst. Nawar Khela who came
to the court, filed the suit but unfortunately before entering into the
wetness box breathed her last. Though the petitioner has taken the
plea that particulars of fraud were not mentioned in the plaint but
when the plaintiff has challenged that she has not alienated her
property through mutations in question and after her death her
legal heirs appeared in witness box and corroborated their stance
than in such an eventuality the beneficiaries were required to prove
the correctness of mutations. It is settled law that pleadings must
contain only factum probanda and not factum probantia. The
material facts on which the party relies for his claim are called
factum probanda and they must be stated in the pleadings. And the
facts or facts by means of which factum probanda (material facts)
are proved and which are in the nature of factum probantia
(particulars or evidence) need not be set out in the pleadings. They
are not facts in issue, but only relevant facts required to be proved
at the trial in order to establish the fact in issue. In the instant case
the plaintiff has alleged what was required to be mentioned in

pleadings thus the objection of petitioners is of no significance.

10. In so far as the contention of learned counsel for petitioner
that the instant matter shall be dealt with in consonance with

Article 126 of Qanun-e-Shahdat Order, 1984 in juxta position with
N

-10-

Article 100 of the Qanun-e-Shahdat Order, 1984, but as stated in
the last paragraph, the onus to prove gift, its particulars,
authenticity of a document, identification of the donor at the time
of her statement before witnesses, absence of her close inmates,
husband, sons has left nothing for its determination and to reach to
an inescapable conclusion that the plaintiff/respondent/plaintiff has
proved her case. I am of the view that in fact the petitioner has
tried to grab the proprietorship of plaintiff and in doing so he
succeeded as well but when challenged remained unsuccessful to

prove it.

11. Turning to the last submission of the learned counsel for
petitioner to remit the case for examination of expert pursuant to
the report submitted by him. Yes, it is an established law that
opinion of an expert can only be affirmed or discarded if he enters
into the witness box but once the expert opined that the
characteristic mark of alleged thumb impression of Mst. Nawar
Khela on mutations are too faint to be compared and when the
application of plaintiff for summoning the expert was resisted by
the petitioners themselves neither there is any force in the
submission of petitioner nor the examination of expert could
provide any premium to the case of petitioner because the opinion
of expert is the weakest type of evidence and can only be
considered if lends support from other convincing and
corroborative evidence which is lacking in the case especially to
substantiate the petitioners contentions. In such circumstances the
case of petitioner does not fall within the parameters of Order XLI

rule 23 & 24 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
-ll-

12. Apart from the above, impugned are the concurrent
findings of fact recorded against the petitioners which do not
call for any interference by this Court in exercise of its
revisional jurisdiction in absence of any illegality or any other
error of jurisdiction. Rel: (2006 SCMR 1304), (2007 SCMR
926), (PLD 2003 SC 155) and (2014 SCMR 1469). Thus, in

view of the above discussion, the instant petition being

without any merit is hereby dismissed.

Announced.
02.02.2022.
Cw
JUDGE
Imranullah PS

(S.B) Hon’ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Naeem Anwar.

