JUDGMENT SHEET
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT
PESHAWAR
(Judicial Department)

Cr.A.No.852-P of 2020.
Date of hearing: 05.10.2021.
M/s Jalal-ud-Din Akbar-e-Azam Khan Gara
and Shabbir Hussain Gigyani, advocates for

the appellants.

Mr.Muhammad Inam Yousafzai, AAG for the
State.

Syed Abdul Fayaz, advocate for the
complainant.

JUDGMENT

LAL JAN KHATTAK, J.- Through this
judgment, we shall also decide the criminal
revision bearing No.129-P of 2020 as both
the matters have arisen from the same
judgment dated 17.10.2020 of the learned
Additional Sessions Judge-lI/MCTC,
Nowshera delivered in case FIR No.59
dated 23.04.2014 under sections
302/148/149 PPC of Police Station Akbar
Pura, Nowshera, whereby the appellants
have been convicted and sentenced under
section 302(b) PPC to imprisonment for life
on two counts. They have also been
directed to pay compensation of
Rs.500,000/- to legal heirs of both the

deceased as envisaged under section 544-A
Cr.P.C. or in default whereof same shall be
recovered as arrears of land revenue. The
appellants have also been convicted under
section 148 PPC read with section 149 PPC
and sentenced to rigorous imprisonment of
three years. Benefit under section 382-B
Cr.P.C. has been given to them. The
appellants have assailed their convictions
and sentences through their joint appeal
whereas the complainant had __ filed
Cr.R.No.129-P of 2020 for enhancement of
the awarded sentence to the normal penalty
of death.

2. Brief facts of the case are that on
23.04.2014, deceased Ibn-e-Ameen, the
then injured, reported to Karim Dad Khan,
ASI in the casualty of civil hospital Pabbi to
the effect that on the day of occurrence
when he and his son Sadiq Ameen reached
near Hujra Babu Salam Akbar Pura while
riding motorbike, there Mukhtaj, Wagar,
Mukhtiar, Shafiq and Aizaz, who were
already present over there, started firing at
them with lethal weapons due to which they
i.e. the complainant and his son, were hit.
According to the FIR (Ex.PW2/1), Sadiq

Ameen died on the spot while the
complainant got seriously wounded. Motive
for the occurrence was stated to be previous
blood feud. Per FIR, Muhammad Nazir and
Muhammad Abbas Khan had witnessed the
occurrence.

3. In order to establish its case,
prosecution produced 12 witnesses
whereafter statements of accused were
recorded wherein they professed their
innocence. After conclusion of the trial, the
learned trial court found the appellants guilty
of the charge and sentenced them as
mentioned above. It is worth to mention that
earlier appellants Wagar, Mukhtiar and
Aizaz were tried and on conclusion were
sentenced to death by the learned trial court
vide judgment dated 07.03.2016, however,
on appeal, their convictions were set aside
by this court vide judgment dated
18.10.2017 and their case was remanded
for trial afresh. During their trial, appellants
Mukhtaj and Shafiq were arrested and put to
face the trial alongwith the three already
arrested accused.

4. Arguments heard and record gone

through.
5. The prosecution case against the
appellants consists of the ocular account
furnished by PW-11, dying declaration of
deceased Ibn-e-Ameen, medical evidence of
both the deceased, recoveries from the spot
in the shape of crime empties and
bloodstained earth, recovery of motorbike
from the spot and site plan of the crime spot.
6. First of all we take up for appreciation
the ocular account furnished by PW-11,
namely, Muhammad Abbas Khan, who is
step brother of deceased Ibn-e-Ameen.
Though his name is mentioned in the FIR as
an eyewitness to the occurrence but we
doubt his presence on the spot at the time of
occurrence for the reason that he had not
accompanied with the victims when they left
their house for Akbar Pura. According to his
testimony, when both the deceased did not
return home, he and his brother Muhammad
Nazir (not produced) went after them to
Akbar Pura and when they reached Akbar
Pura bazar near the Hujra of Babu Salam,
there all the five accused started firing at his
brother and nephew with which they were hit
and fell down from the motorbike. As per his

deposition, both the deceased after hitting
entered into the Hujra of Babu Salam in
order to save their lives where also they
were fired at by the accused. The witness
further deposed that with the fire shots
Sadiq Ameen died on the spot whereas
Ibn-e-Ameen sustained injuries and was
taken to the hospital where he was
examined by the doctor and in his presence,
the injured reported about the occurrence.

7. Evidence of Muhammad Abbas Khan
(PW-11) cannot be accepted for safe
administration of justice on the ground that
initially he was not with the victims when
they left for Akbar Pura. He stated that he
went behind his brother and nephew when
they got late. In his evidence nowhere he
has stated that he was aware of both the
deceased going to Akbar Pura bazar and
when he had no knowledge of the victims for
their going to Akbar Pura bazar, then how
he left for their search to the particular place
i.e. the bazar. Also worth mentioning is the
statement of PW-11 when he stated that “it
is correct that the wife of the deceased had
not informed me about the specific places in
Akbar Pura nor the name of the person with

whom they had to meet”.
8. When neither the specific place was
known to the witness nor the person whom
the deceased had gone to meet, then his
seeing the deceased and that too at the time
of occurrence can only be termed an extra
ordinary happening and an extra ordinary
event has to be properly explained by the
person who claims to have seen it which is
not the case in hand. No doubt, sometime
extra ordinary events do take place but in
the attending circumstances of the case,
presence of PW-11 is not believable on the
spot as neither he knew the person whom
his brother and nephew had gone to meet
nor the place of their visit anywhere (as
mentioned earlier), therefore, arrival of the
witness on the spot at the time of
occurrence is doubtful, hence his evidence
cannot be believed in.

9. Now we take up the FIR-cum-dying
declaration of the then injured, namely,
Ibn-e-Ameen, who while reporting to ASI
Karim Dad in injured condition in the
casualty of civil hospital Pabbi stated to the
effect that on 23.04.2014 he and his son
Sadiq Ameen were riding motorbike and

when they reached near the crime spot
there all the five accused already present
over there started firing at them with As/aha-
e-Atisheen with which he and his son were
hit. According to the contents of the FIR
(Ex.PW2/1), with the fire shots the
complainant was seriously injured while his
son on hitting died on the spot. It is worth to
add that PW-11, namely, Muhammad Abbas
is rider of the FIR and on extreme left corner
whereof there is entry by the doctor to the
effect that the patient was alive and
conscious.

10. No doubt, as stated earlier, on
extreme right corner of the FIR, there is
endorsement of the doctor showing that the
patient at the time of lodging of the FIR was
alive and conscious but such endorsement
alone would not be enough to hold that the
contents of the FIR were correct qua the
assailants. Of course, declaration given by a
person at the time of his death carries great
importance as to its truthfulness but there
are certain pre-requisites which must be
there in order to believe such declaration as
true and one of them is that the declaration
must be made without the interference of

any close relative of the dying man who is
found present around the dier at the time of
making the statement and second the
declaration must be corroborated by the
circumstances prevailing on the spot at the
time of occurrence. Furthermore, it is also
necessary to see, in order to believe a dying
declaration, whether at the time of his death
the dying person was capable to narrate the
event occurred before his death.

11. | On the touchstone of the above, if we
look at the dying declaration of deceased
Ibn-e-Ameen, it would appear that same
was not free from foreign interference as his
step brother, namely, Muhammad Abbas
Khan (PW-11) was present around him at
the time when such statement was being
made. It is worth mentioning that in the
preceding paragraph we have already
disbelieved the testimony of Muhammad
Abbas Khan and in such like situation
interference on behalf of said witness in the
statement of his brother, who was returning
to his Creator to make an exaggerated
account of the occurrence, cannot be ruled
out.

12. Besides the above, physical condition

of the declarant too was not such which
could allow him to narrate the occurrence as
has been narrated by him. His medical
examination shows that he has received the
following firearm injuries on his person:-

1. Asingle firearm entry wound 1 x 1
cm on right interior flank with exit
wound 3 x 5 cm on left side of lower
back just lateral to the lumbar spine.
2. Asingle firearm entry wound 1 x 1
cm on lateral side of left buttock with
exit wound 2 x 4 cm on upper medical
side of left buttock.

3. A single firearm entry wound 1 x 1
cm on left upper guardant (left
hypochondrium) with exit wound 2 x 2
cm on right side of upper back.

4. One through and through firearm
wound with entry wound 1 x 1.5 cm in
epigastria region with exit wound 2 x
1 cm on upper middle back.

Moreover, the medical officer who
had examined the declarant had found his
condition very serious (Ex.PW2/1)
whereafter referred him for further treatment
to LRH. If we see the endorsement of the
medical officer appearing at the corner of
the FIR and the referral chit, it would appear
that the deceased at the time of his death

could not be in a position to narrate about
10

the occurrence in detail as has been
narrated in the FIR.

13. In addition, the dying declaration of
the deceased has also not been supported
by site plan of the case. It is in the FIR that
the deceased were hit by the fire shots when
they were riding on motorbike and after
hitting they fell down. According to the site
plan, both the victims were hit at points No.1
and 2 and the motorbike has been shown at
point ‘A’. As per the site plan (Ex.PW5/1),
after falling on the ground at point No.1 and
2, both the deceased then went up to point
1A and 2A and the inter se distance
between point 1, 2 and 1A and 2A is 17/18
paces. Keeping in view the serious
conditions of both the victims, it was not
possible for them to cover a distance of
17/18 paces and let assume that they were
in a position to move and they did so, then
there must have been some trail of blood
from point where they were hit and fallen
and the point 1A and 2A _ whereafter
receiving firearm injuries they had reached
which is not the case in hand. Therefore, the
site plan does not corroborate the facts as

narrated in the FIR.
11

14. For the above stated reasons, we
hold that the dying declaration of
Ibn-e-Ameen cannot be believed in for
conviction of the appellants for the safe
administration of justice.

15. Another important aspect of the case
is that there is no report of FSL that the 03
empties of 222 bore and 9 empties of 7.62
bore collected from the spot were fired from
more than one weapons. In the instant case,
five persons, four of whom are brothers and
one is nephew, are charged for the murder
of two persons. In such like situation,
production of the FSL report showing that
the empties were fired from five weapons
was must which material piece of evidence
the prosecution has not produced and it
appeared to us that the charge was
exaggerated one which lamentable trend is
very common in the area.

16. Thorough and careful examination of
the case record has led this court to believe
that the prosecution has not proved its case
against the appellants beyond any shadow
of doubt, which is a hallmark of criminal
jurisprudence. The prosecution case is full

of doubts benefit of which must go to the
12

appellants being a century old principle of
criminal law. It appears to us that the
learned trial court has not appreciated the
case evidence in its true perspective and
has fallen in legal error to convict the
appellants. _

17. For what has been discussed above,
we accept this appeal, set aside the
impugned judgment of conviction and acquit
the appellants of the charge leveled against
them. They be set at liberty forthwith if not
required to be detained or wanted in any
other case.

18. Above are the reasons of our short
order of even date.

19. So far as Cr.R.No.129-P of 2020 is
concerned, as we have set aside the
impugned judgment of conviction, therefore,
the criminal revision has become infructuous

which is hereby dismissed. .

JUDGE
an
JUDGE
Announced.
05.10.2021.

Sadiq Shah CS (DB) (Hon'ble Mr. Justice Lal Jan Khattak & Hon'ble Justice Musarrat
Hilali)
