JUDGMENT SHEET
PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, MINGORA

BENCH (DAR-UL-QAZA), SWAT
(Judicial Department)

Cr.A No. 204-M/2020

Najeeb Ullah son of Muhammad Ilyas (Appellant)
Versus

(1) The State through A.A.G.
. (2) Jamil Khan IHC of Police Station Dargai
. (Respondents)

Present: Mr. Said Hakim, Advocate.
Mr. Sohail Sultan, Astt:A.G.
, . Muhammad Raziq, Advocate.

Cr.R. No. 12-M/2019

Hayat Khan son of Sher Ali Khan .
(Petitioner)
Versus ,

(1) State through A.A.G.
_ (2) Najeeb Ullah son of Muhammad Ilyas
. (Respondents)

Present: Muhammad Razig, Advocate.

Mr. Sohail Sultan, Astt: A.G.

Mr. Said Hakim, Advocate.

Date of hearing: 28.01.2021
JUDGMENT
WIQAR AHMAD, J Appellant namely Najeeb
Ullah has called in question judgment of _his
conviction and sentence dated 14.01.2019 passed by

learned Additional Sessions Judge/Juvenile Court

Nawab (0.8.) Hon'tite tir. dusticé'téhtiag Ibrahim
Hon'ble Mr. Justice Wiqar Anmad
Malakand at Dargai, vide which he was sentenced as

follows;

© USS 302 (b) PPC to life imprisonment as Tazir
along with compensation of Rs. 50,000/- (fifty
thousand) under section 544-A Cr.P.C payable
to legal heirs of the deceased, or in default
thereof, accused shall further undergo six
months simple imprisonment.

© Appellant was also extended. benefit of section
382-B Cr.P.C. .

2. | Appellant faced trial in the criminal
case registered vide FIR No. 335 (Ex.PA) dated
04.09.2016 under section 302 PPC at Police Station
Dargai District Malakand, on the basis of ‘Murasila’
(Ex. PA/1) sent by Jameel Khan, IHC (PW-8) to the
police station on 04.09.2016. Complainant namely
Jameel Khan, THC along with other police ‘Nati
‘had gone to the place of occurrence i.e. mountain,
after receiving information that dead body of a male
‘deceased had been lying there, in | mutilated
condition. During search of the dead body, the police
-recovered a National Identity Card from his pocket,
disclosing his name as Dawlat Khan son of Sher Ali
Khan. The police had also found marks of wounds
on body of the deceased. ‘Murasila’ was drafted
which culminated into ibid FIR registered against
unknown accused at police station concerned.

Nawab —(0.8.) Horitble Mr. Justice Ishtisq‘torahim
Hon'ble Mr. ‘Justice Wiqar Ahmad.
Thereafter, appellant was found connected with
commission of the offence, initially on the basis of
CDR data and he was arrayed as an accused in the
case in hand.

3. After registration of the case,
investigation ensued. Investigating Officer had
recovered blood from the place of deceased vide
recovery memo Ex. PW-4/1 dated 04.09.2016. He
also recovered a live cartridge and an empty shell of
pistol vide recovery memo Ex. PW-4/2 dated
04.09.2016. The appellant was arrested on
_ 07.09.2016, whose confessional statement was
’ recorded by the Magistrate on 10.09.2016. The
police also recovered a weapon of offence i.e. 30
bore pistol along with charger loaded with four live |
rounds from possession of one Noman on the basis
of information allegedly disclosed by the appellant,
vide recovery memo Ex. PW-7/1 dated 08.09.2016.
Crime empty so recovered from the spot and the
weapon of offence had also been sent to Forensic
Science Laboratory (hereinafter referred to "as
“FSL”) for comparison, report (Ex.PZ) received

therefrom was placed on file.

Nawab (0:8.)' Hon'ble Mr. Justied ishtieg Ibrahim
: Hon’tlé MP, Justice Wiqar- Ahmed
4, On completion of investigation,
complete challan was submitted against appellant
before learned Juvenile court. After compliance of
proceedings under section 265-C Cr.P.C, charge was
framed against him on 03.01.2017 to which he
pleaded “not guilty " and claimed tril Proseéution
produced eight witnesses, whose statements were |
recorded and placed on file. On conclusion of
proceedings in the case, accused was examined
under section 342 Cr.P.C, Learned trial Court
convicted and sentenced the appellant vide
impugned Judgment dated 14.01.2019, as stated
earlier. '

Feeling aggrieved from his conviction
and sentence, accused/appellant has filed the instant
appeal before this Court while petitioner has also
filed connected Criminal Revision No. 12-M of 2019
for enhancement of the sentence awarded to
accused/respondent. |
5. We have heard arguments of learned
counsel for the parties, learned Astt: AG. appearing

on behalf of State and perused the record.

Nawab {ote ot big mrduistice tsnuigg brani
Hon'Ste-Mr-duslide wigar'Anmed
6. Perusal of record reveals | that
prosecution have mainly been relying upon
confessional statement of the appellant (Ex.PW-1/2)
recorded on 10.09.2016. Age of | the
accused/appellant was shown as 18 years in the card
of arrest Ex. PW-8/6 but later on his date of birth has
been determined as 02.04.2001 on ‘the basis of
school record. There has been no dispute thereafter
that his date of birth has actually been 02.04.2001
and he had been a juvenile of the age of less than 16
years at the time of commission of the offence. It
was for said reason that challan ‘against him was
submitted before juvenile Court and he has been
tried as a juvenile. His age has been shown as 16
years in the charge framed which has nowhere been
disputed by the prosecution. Recording _of a
confessional statement of a juvenile accused required
more care and caution as held by Hon’ble Supreme
Court of Pakistan in its Judgment given in the case of
“Hashim Qasim _and_another_v/s_The State”
reported as 2017 SCMR 986 wherein the Hon’ble

Court has held;

Nawab (68) Hon’b(é'itr. Justice Ishtiag Ibrahim
Hon'‘ble-Mr. Justice Wiqar Ahmad
“In the instant case, we are confronted with confession
consisting of almost six full scape sentences. The accused,
Khayam Khurshid was treated as Juvenile by the
Prosecution itself being of the age of sixteen years or less at
the relevant time; he remained in the custody of the police
for many days, however, the recording Magistrate did not
provide him sufficient time for reflection to recompose.
Being a Juvenile (minor), it was appropriate and desirable
that he should have been provided counseling/consultation
Jacility of natural guardian or any close blood relative of
mature age, having no clash of interest with him in the case
in hand but no such care and caution was observed by the
Magistrate.”

Section 10 of the Juvenile Justice

- System Ordinance 2000 (hereinafter referred to as

“Qrdinance”) provided the mode and manner in

which a juvenile offender has to -be’ dealt with, at

the time of his arrest. Said section being relevant is
reproduced hereunder for ready reference;

Arrest_and bail, (1) Where a child is arrested ‘for
commission of an offence, the officer incharge of the police
station in which the child is detained shall, as soon as may
‘be, inform.. a. the guardian of the child, if he can be found,

of such arrest and inform him of the time, date and name of
the Juvenile Court before which the child shall be
produced; and b. the concerned Probation Officer to enable
him to obtain such information about the child and other
material circumstances which may be of assistance to the
juvenile Court for making inquiry. :

(2) Where a child accused of non-bail able offence is
arrested, he shall, without any delay and in no case later
than twenty-four hours from such arrest, be produced
before the Juvenile Court.

(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of the Code, a child
accused of a bail able offence shall, if already not released
under Section 496 of Code, be released by the juvenile
Court on bail, with or without surety, unless it appears that
there are reasonable grounds for believing that the release
of the child shall bring him into association with any
criminal or expose the child to any danger, in which case,
the child shall be placed under the custody of a Probation
officer or a suitable person or institution dealing with the
welfare of the children if parents or guardian of the child is
not present, but shall.not under any circumstances be kept
in a police station or jail in such cases.

Nawab (ee B:) Hén' te Mr. Justice \shilag (brahim
, Hon'ble Mr. Justice Wigar Ahmad
(4) The Juvenile Court shall, in a case where a child is not
granted bail under sub-section (3), direct for tracing the
guardian of such child and where the guardian of the child
is traced out, the juvenile Court may immediately release.the
child on bail. ; . .
(5) Where a child under the age of fifteen years is arrested
or detained for an offence which is punishable with the
imprisonment of less than ten years, shall be treated a sif he
was accused of commission of a bailable offence.

(6) No child under the age of fifteen years shall be arrested .
under any of the laws dealing with the previous detention or
under the provisions of Chapter VII of the Code.

(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code and
except where a Juvenile Court is of the opinion that the
delay in the trial of the accused has been occasioned by an
act or omission of the accused or any other person acting on
his behalf or in exercise of any right or privilege under any
law for the time being in force, a child who, for commission
of an offence, has been detained, shall be released on bail.

There is nothing on record to suggest
that either any intimation or information had been
given to any guardian of the appellant at the time of
his arrest or before recording of his confession or
that he had ever been provided a counsel at the time
of his arrest or at the time of recording his”
confessional statement. He had been arrested on
07.09.2016 and produced for recording his
confession before the Magistrate on 10.09.2016 but
nowhere it could be shown that he had ever been
provided any counsel or an opportunity of consulting
with his guardian. In the case of “Abdul Haleem v/s
The State” reported as 1984 P Cr. LJ Karachi 611
Hon’ble Karachi High Court has held that an
accused of such an age could easily be duped to give .

Nawab (06.}. Hon'ble Mtf. Justice Ishtiag Ibrahim
Hon'ble Mr. Justice Wiqar Atbinad
statement as tutored to him by the local police and
due to said reason the Magistrate had to.be extra-
cautious in recording confession of a minor. It was
held that before recording the confession he had to
make sure that the accused had been giving the
confessional statement freely and without any

pressure or coercion. This Court in its earlier

judgment given in the case of “Zahir Rehman and

another_v/s_State_ through A.A.G_and. another”

reported as 2018 P CrLJ 1465 has. also. held,

regarding the susceptibility of a minor to tutoring,

pressure and coercion by the police;

Confession of a minor is to be assessed on the same
touchstone as to that of statement of a child witness rather child
witness is brought to the dock by relatives while on the contrary
child accused is brought to the Court by police officials for
recording his confessional statement where possibility of
tutoring and police fear is always there. Reliance is placed on
the judgment in the case of "State through Advocate General,
Sindh, Karachi v. Farman Hussain and others" (PLD 1995
Supreme Court 1).

“Whether the appellant was able to understand the
nature of questions put to him by the Judicial Magistrate or
otherwise, in this regard an example of answer given by the
appellant to Question No.13 has already been given in the
preceding para from which it can easily be assessed that the
appellant was not able to understand the nature of the questions
or to give rational answers thereof. This Court while deciding
the case of "Abdul Hamid v. The State" (PLD 1980 Peshawar
23) observed that :-

sseoees Besides the other discrepancies in their statements,
one thing is very significant and it suggests very strongly
that though they are disinterested witnesses yet because
of their tender age, they were positively under the
influence of the Investigating Agency. This we say so

Nawab (0; 8.) Hon’ bem. Justice Ishttaq tbrahim
Hon'ble Mr. Justice. Wiqar Anmad:
because unless they were tutored either by the
Investigating Agency or by their elders they could not
have possibly stated that the accused was armed with a
rifle and has used the same in the commission of the

offence".

16. In the circumstances when utmost care is to be taken
while assessing the testimony of a child witness, on the same
yardstick extraordinary care and caution should have been
taken by the Judicial Magistrate while recording the
confessional statement of the appellant and the learned trial
Court as well by evaluating his such statement Sor his
conviction especially when the offence carries ‘capital
punishment. ”

No extra care or caution appears to have
been taken by the Judicial Magistrate in the casé in’
hand while recording confession of the appellant. He
had just been given a short period of 30 minutes for,
pondering " over his confession and then the
confession had been recorded in a mechanical
manner. Such a time span of 30 minutes was
insufficient to remove the fears and apprehensions
from his mind which might have been inculcated in
his mind by the long police custody. Such a time has
even been held to be insufficient in case of even
major accused in earlier judgment of this Court in
the case of “Kabir Shah_v/s The State through
A.A,G and another” reported as 2016 YLR 1291.

7. Learned counsel for complainant as
well as learned Astt:A.G tried to justify as to why

had he not been treated by the arresting officer as

Nawab (0'B.) Hon‘ble Mr. Justice Ishtiag Ibrahim
. Hon'ble Mr. Justice Wigar. Ahmad
-10-

| well as the Magistrate as a juvenile is required to be
treated under section 10 of the Ordinance, by _
‘arguing that his age had first been written as 18 years
in the card of arrest and it was on 17.09.2016 that his
actual date of birth had come on record. This
explanation cannot be taken as a plausible reason,
due to the fact that even vntiting of his age by
arresting officer as 18 years at the time of his arrest
seem to have been motivated by the desire of such
officer to deprive the appellant ftom his rights under
the Ordinance. At the time of recording his
confession he had also disclosed to the Magistrate
that he had been a student of class 10, but even then
the learned Magistrate had not taken care to confirm
his date of birth and to deal him as a juvenile
accused. In the given circumstances, confessional
“statement of the appellant cannot be relied upon so
as to maintain a conviction on a capital charge.
Besides there has not been strong evidence available
with the prosecution which could have corroborated .
the confessional statement of appellant. In the case

"of “Muhammad Ismail_v/s The State” reported as

2017 SCMR. 898 when the Hon’ble Supreme Court

Nawab (6.8). Hon'tle Mr-Justice tshtlag {brahim .
Hon'ble Mr. Justice’ Wigar Ahmad:
-11-

of Pakistan had ‘not found the retracted confession .
supported by an independent corroboration , the
accused had been extended benefit of doubt by
setting aside the conviction. Relevant part of
observations of the august Court is reproduced .
hereunder for ready reference;

“The only other piece of evidence remaining in the field was
a judicial confession allegedly made by Muhammad Iqrar,
Khalid Hussain and Shakir Ali appellants before a
Magistrate under section 164, Cr.P.C. but admittedly the
said judicial confession had been retracted by the appellants
before the trial court and in the absence of any independent
corroboration such retracted judicial confession could not

suffice all by itself for recording or upholding the
appellants' convictions.”

8.. The other piece of evidence prosecution
have been relying upon was the CDR data brought
on record as Ex. PW8/4. Said data cannot be relied
upon for the reason that the cell number attributed to
the appellant had not been on his name. It has though
been on the name of his brother Inayat Ullah but no
other evidence has been led before the trial Court so
as to establish that the mobile Sim or phone had been
in use of the appellant. Same cannot therefore. be
) relied upon safely.

9. So far as the recovery of weapon of
offence and its matching FSL report is concerned, it

is conspicuous on record that recovery of the pistol

Nawab (0.B.) Hon'ble Mr: Justice Ishtlaq Ibrahim
: Hon'bie Mr. Justice Wigar Ahmad
-12-

had not been effected from direct. possession of the
appellant, or on his pointation. The pistol had been
recovered on pointation of one Noman. The
Investigating Officer while appearing in Court as
PW-8 has tried to explain that said pistol had
in-fact been handed over by Noman to his friend
namely Mushtaq Khan and from him it had been
acquired by the appellant but neither Noman nor his
other friend namely Mushtaq Khan could be
produced by the prosecution, as witnesses. Appellant
cannot be tagged with recovery of the pistol on mere
statement of the Investigating Officer. ‘When
recovery of weapon of offence was not shown to
have been effected from the appellant then the
matching FSL report would be of no ‘help to the case
of prosecution.

10. There has not been any independent
evidence of the motive for commission of the
offence also. It was a case of circumstantial evidence
and prosecution was duty bound to have established
the whole chain of circumstances in their evidence in
a way that it got netted together a chain starting from

the dead body at one end and touching neck of the

Nawab (6.8) Hon'ble Mr: Justica tshtiag Ibrahim
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Wiqar Ahmad
-13-

_ accused on the other, as held by Hon’ble Supreme

Court of Pakistan in the case of “Hashim Qasim and

another v/s The State” reported as 2017 SCMR 986.
11. ‘Prosecution have not been able to bring
home guilt of the accused/appellant beyond
reasonable doubt. The accused/appellant is therefore
acquitted of the charges by allowing the. instant
appeal and extending him benefit of doubt. He be
released forthwith if not required in any other case.
Criminal Revision No. 12-M of 2019 has become
infructuous and same is dismissed accordingly.

12. These are reasons for our short order of

even date, which read as follows;

' “For reasons to be recorded later, we allow this appeal,

set-aside the judgment of conviction dated 14.01.2019
passed by learned Additional Sessions Judge/ Judge
Juvenile Court Malakand at Dargai in case FIR No.

335 dated 04.09.2016 registered under section 302 PPC
at Police Station Dargai District Malakand and
resultantly acquit the appellant namely Najeeb Ullah of
the charges levelled against him. -He be released
forthwith if not required in any other case.”

Announced
Dt.28.01.2021

Nawab 0 By yi ‘Hon! ile, iar: ‘puistice! asntiag rahim
“Hon'ble Mrosustiée Wigar Abritad
