-l-
JUDGMENT SHEET

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
MINGORA BENCH (DAR-UL-QAZA), SWAT
: (Judicial Department)

Cr.A No. 88-M/2020
With M.R No. 1-M/2020

Muhammad SHAPE... cscccssccerecncensescevesere (Appellant)
vs

The State & another. ..iccicveccssccoseceeee (Respondents)

Present: Mr. Abdul Munim Khan, Advocate for the
appellant. .

Mr. Sohail Sultan, Asst:A.G for the State.

Mr. Iftikhar . Ali Khan, Advocate for the
respondent No. 2.

Date of hearing: 25.11.2020
, JUDGMENT
WIQAR_AHMAD, J.- Appellant has called in

question judgment of his conviction and sentence dated
26.02.2020 through the instant appeal, whereby he has

been handed down the following penalty;

f
i. Death penalty as Ta’zir for causipg murder
of Mst. Shazia Begum under section 302 (b)
PPC.
ii, Death penalty as Ta’zir for causing murder
of Mst. Shahida Parveen under section 302
(b) PPC.
iii, To. pay Rs. 10,00,000/- to legal heirs
: of deceased Mst. Shazia Begum and
Mst. Shahida Parveen under section 544-A
Cr. PC or in default thereof, he was ordered
to undergo simple imprisonment for six (06)
months;

2, ; Appellant has faced trial in a case initiated

vide report of Commander-IJI Wing Bajaur Levies,

Abdul Sabooh/* (D.B.) Hon’ble Mr. Justice Ishtiag Ibrahim
Hon'ble Mr. Justice Wiqar Ahmad

Pe

+.

‘-Fiaa

ay"

ha

ee nd

Be]
beet

-2-

wherein he has stated that he had received information

on 29.08.2018 at 12 noon that somebody had killed

two ladies at village Umaray Mamund District Bajaur.

On receipt of such information, he had proceeded to
the spot of occurrence along with Quarter Master
Subdear-I wing and other levies personnel, where he
found - that appellant namely Muhammad Shafiq
bearing built No. 803580 in Bajaur Scouts, had killed
his wife namely Mst. Shazia Begum who had been
teaching at Primary School Umaray as PST teacher, as
well as her sister namely Mst. Shahida Bibi, by firing
at both the ladies with his pistol. Appellant had been
encircled and arrested by people of the local
village, who was handed over to the levies officials
and was taken to lock-up at Khar. The pistol along
with its magazine were deposited in official Maal Khan
(v6 Je), The appellant was further alleged to have
disclosed before arresting officer that he had married
Mst. Shazia Bibi about two years ago but due to
strained relations between the spouses, she had been
divorced two months before the occurrence, under the
compelling influences of Major Sheraz and Hawaldar
Raees. It was disclosed that Hawaldar Raees had been
talking to his wife via telephone, in his presence due to
which he had killed the lady. Sister of his former wife

Abdul Sabooh/* (D.B.) Hon’ble Mr. Justice Ishtiaq Ibrahim
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Wiqar Ahmad

i. a: ee ss

a Ea
3.

was stated to have been killed for the reason that she
had been instrumental in bringing disharmony in the

wedlock.

3. Initially, appellant was handed over to
Bajaur Scouts (a paramilitary force) for trial. After
thorough investigation, he was recommended for
imposition of penalty under the disciplinary rules of his
service. The competent authority i.e. Inspector General
Frontier Corps (North) also issued direction to Bajaur
Scouts for handing back the appellant to Political
Administration under section 8(2) of Frontier Corps
Ordinance, 1959 for undergoing trial. The Assistant
Commissioner, Nawagai then took cognizance of the
case under the erstwhile FATA Interim Governance
Regulation, 2018 (hereinafter referred to as ‘FIGR’).
He referred the matter to jirga/council of elders for
their opinion as per the terms of reference framed vide
order dated 11.10.2018. The case was then referred to
regular Court for trial in the backdrop of merger of the
area of Bajaur Agency into Province of Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa on promulgation of 25" Constitutional
Amendment, wherein prosecution submitted final
report (complete documents) before the trail Court.
Charge was framed against him on 15.07.2019 to
which he pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. The case

Abdul Sabooh/* (D.B.} Hon’ble Mr. Justice Ishtiaq Ibrahim
Hon'ble Mr. Justice Wiqar Ahmad
-4-

was then posted for prosecution evidence. The
prosecution examined six (6) witnesses. On conclusion
of prosecution evidence, statement of accused was
recorded under section 342 Cr. PC. At conclusion of
proceedings in the case, the learned trial Court
convicted the appellant and awarded him punishment

as per the sentence reproduced above.
4. Arguments heard and record perused.

5. Perusal of record reveals that prosecution
has mainly been relying upon confessional statement
of the accused recorded before Naib Tehsildar Bakht
Jehan (PW-1), statement of complainant recorded as
Pw-3, and statement of a local elder namely Malak
Faqir Muhammad recorded as PW-4 as well as
statement of brother of the deceased ladies recorded as

PW-6.

6. We would first deal with confessional
statement of the accused/appellant. Prosecution has
produced Bakht Jehan formerly Naib Tehsildar
Mamund as PW-1. He has stated in his examination-in-
chief that on receipt of information of the occurrence,
he had proceeded to the spot along with other
personnel of Levies, where he had found appellant tied

with a tree being apprehended by people of the locality

Abdul Sabooh/* (D.B.) Hon’ble Mr. Justice Ishtiag Ibrahim
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Wiqar Ahmad
-5-

after commission of the offence. Appellant had been
released there-from and taken in custody by him. He
has further stated that on same day, the appellant had
been produced before him for recording his
confessional statement, where he had given a time of
15-20 minutes to accused for reflections and had
thereafter recorded his confessional statement, which
was exhibited as Ex PW 1/1. Appellant had then been
handed over to Bajaur Scouts. He had been returned
back to the custody of the PW on 29.09.2018,
whereafter he had recorded statement of complainant
namely Laal Zada and had submitted record of the case
before Assistant Commissioner Nawagai for further
proceedings. In the opening line of his cross-
examination, he submitted that he had also conducted
partial investigation in the case. The main question that
lies lurking on the face of record is, “whether a
confession recorded before a Naib Tehsildar on
29.08.2018 may be read as evidence against the
appellant?” In this respect, learned counsel for
complainant as well as learned Asst:A.G have
vehemently contended that since investigations in the
case had been conducted under the repealed FIGR,
wherein continuity had been given to all the fora
existing in the FCR, therefore the Naib Tehsildar being

Abdu! Sabooh/* (D.B.) Hon’ble Mr, Justice Ishtiaq Ibrahim
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Wiqar Ahmad

we

re

2 Ee

pe Ue
-6- _
a Magistrate in the erstwhile regime, had fully been

competent to record confessional statement of an
accused. They also placed reliance on Article 264 of
the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973
(hereinafter referred to as ‘Constitution’) ‘and
submitted that the investigations which had taken place
under the repealed regime of laws should be deemed
protected and must be considered in the context of the

earlier system.

7. There has been no cavil with the
proposition that Article 264 of the Constitution gives
protection to investigations conducted under a repealed
statue when the repeal takes place as a result or on the
dent of the Constitution. FCR stood repealed with
repeal of Article 247 of the Constitution by 25"
Constitutional amendment, therefore Article 264 of the
Constitution may be referred in a case, where certain
proceedings have taken place under the repealed FCR,
and it has also been so held by this Court in its earlier
judgment given in the case of Shah Zal vs. the State

J .Cr.A No. 1184-P/2019) in the following words;

“The criminal liability incurred by the
appellant has been expressly saved by the
wordings of Article 264 of the Constitution.
The repeal of the FCR cannot be deemed to
have been affecting the punishment imposed
on the appellant and upheld upto the august

Abdul Sabooh/* {D.B.) Hon’ble Mr. Justice Ishtiag Ibrahim
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Wiqar Ahmad
-7-

Supreme Court of Pakistan. In the case of
Muhammad Arif and another vs. The State
and another reported as 1993 SCMR 1589, the
Hon’ble Apex Court had cited with approval
the judgment of the House of Lords of
England given in the case of Wicks vs.
Director of Public Prosecutions (1947),
whereby the conviction of the appellant had
been upheld under the Emergency Powers
(Defence), Act, 1939, because of existence of
section 11(3) in the said Act. The ibid section
of law provided that the expiry of the Act
should not affect its past operation, as
respects things previously done or omitted to
be done. The Hon’ble Court further held in
the said judgment as follows;

16. From the above cited cases, it is evident
that there is judicial consensus that where a
law is repealed, it will not inter alia affect
any investigation, legal proceedings or
remedy in respect of any right, privilege,
obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or
punishment, and any such investigation,
legal proceedings or remedy may be
instituted, continued or enforced, and any
such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may
be imposed as if the law had not been
repealed.”

Further ahead in said judgment, it was

also held;

“Thus there remains no doubt that the
punishment awarded to the appellant had
attained finality before the promulgation of
25th Constitutional Amendment on
31.05.2018 and same shall be deemed to be
protected under Article 264 of the
Constitution, despite repeal of the FCR.”

koa”

a

& ¥s,

reer sd ee ei. ao

*

8. It is important to be noted that FIGR had
been promulgated by the President of Pakistan in
exercise of the powers vested in him by clause 5 of
Article 247 of the Constitution on 25" May, 2018.
Article 247 of the Constitution was repealed by

Abdul Sabooh/* (D.B.) Hon’ble Mr. Justice Ishtiaq Ibrahim
Hon'ble Mr. Justice Wigar Ahmad
-8-

promulgation of 25" Constitutional Amendment on
31% May, 2018. Not only FCR but the FIGR also stood
repealed on said date, on 31.05.2018. Neither of the
two regulations had been holding the field at the date

of commission of the offence i.e. 29.08.2018.

9. The Naib Tehsildar Mamund was
therefore not having any legal capacity to exercise the
powers of a Magistrate. Statement of the accused
recorded before him cannot therefore be considered as
a valid confessional statement recorded before a
Magistrate. Same has therefore been inadmissible in
evidence. Proceedings conducted by political
authorities under erstwhile FCR or FIGR may be given
protection under Article 264 of the Constitution,
provided it had taken place during currency of the FCR
or FIGR and not after its repeal. It has amply been

made clear by the Hon’ble Apex Court in the case of

National Commission on Status of Women through
Chairperson and others vs Government of Pakistan

through Secretary Law _and_ Justice_and_others
reported as PLD 2019 Supreme Court 218, that on
promulgation of 25" Constitutional Amendment, all
the laws of land had become applicable in erstwhile
FATA. Relevant part of observation of august Court is
reproduced hereunder for ready reference;

Abdul Sabooh/* (D.B.) Hon’ble Mr. Justice Ishtiaq Ibrahim
Hon’ ble Mr. Justice Wiqar Ahmad
-9-
|

“After the 25th Amendment, all the residents
of the Province of KPK are similarly placed,
there is no rational basis on which the people
of FATA can be distinguished from the people .
of the rest of the province of KPK and thus
the application of the FATA Interim
Regulation to one part of KPK while the rest
of the province enjoys the protection of the
provincial laws is absolutely unjustified,
grossly discriminatory and in contravention
of the fundamental right to equal protection.
Whether they be residents of FATA on one
hand or of Peshawar or Mardan, etc. on the
other, they cannot be discriminated against
and any classification between them despite
being residents of the same province, with no
obvious or reasonably deducible distinction
between them, will be arbitrary and against
the recognized principles of natural justice
and the rule of law. Thus, with the merger of
FATA in the Province of KPK, by applying
the ratio of Azizullah Memon's case (supra), it
becomes expedient to ensure that all the
residents of the Province of KPK (including
the people of the erstwhile FATA) do not face
any discrimination of the basis of their
residential location and are accorded equal
protection of the law, and their right to fair
trial, access to courts and due process are
secured.”

We can therefore safely held that on the
date of recording confessional statement of the
accused/appellant, Criminal Frocedure Code, 1898 had
been applicable in the case and a_ confessional

statement not recorded before Magistrate, cannot be

,
considered as a valid piece of evidence.

: |
10. When the confessional statement is taken
out of consideration, then, no direct evidence of
|
commission of the offence by the appellant, has been

i

|
available with the prosecution. There has been

Abdul Sabooh/* (D.B.) Hon’ble Mr, Justice Ishtiag Ibrahim
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Wigar Ahmad
'
>

-10-

evidence of facts occurring after the incident, but no
evidence of the actual occurrence has been available

with the prosecution.

11. Naib Tehsildar while recording his
statement as PW-1 as well as complainant while
recording his statement as PW-3 had stated that on
receipt of information, they had proceeded to the place
of occurrence where appellant’ had been tied by the
local people with a tree whereafter he had been
unfastened and taken in custody, None of the two
witnesses have been eye-witnesses of the occurrence.
Same was the case with Malak Fagit Muhammad, who
had also reached the spot after receipt of information
of the occurrence when people had already tied
appellant with a tree. He had not been an eye-witness
of the occurrence also. Statement of another witness
namely Anwar-ul-Haq Assistant Political Agent
Nawagai has been recorded as PW-5 but he has also
narrated the proceedings conducted after arrest of the
accused/appellant. Statement of PW-6 may be
considered in the context of existence of motive but no
more than that. It is thus clear that there had been no
direct evidence regarding cominission of the offence

by the appellant. Some people of village Umaray might

have seen the occurrence but none of them have been

Abdul Sabooh/* {D.B.) Hon’bie Mr. Justice Ishtiaq Ibrahim
Hon’ble Mr, Justice Wiqar Ahmad
-l1-

produced in evidence. The . deficiency of ocular
evidence of the actual occurrence cannot be deemed
supplied by the subsequent evidence of arrest of the
appellant. In the case of Muhammad Anwar vs. The
State reported as 1997 P Cr. L J 2075, when the
Hon’ble Lahore High Court disbelieved presence of
two eye-witnesses, the corroboratory evidence of
recovery of blood-stained dagger etc were not found
sufficient for sustaining conviction on a capital charge.
Relevant part of observation of the Hon’ble Court is

reproduced hereunder for ready reference;

“The other evidence incriminating the
appellant is the recovery of the blood-
stained dagger and the medical evidence
indicates that there were sixteen injuries
on the person of the deceased. Be that as it
may, all this evidence would not be
collectively or individually sufficient to
form basis of conviction unless the
presence of the two eye-witnesses is
established and credence could be
attached to their testimony. We agree with
the submissions made by the learned
counsel for the appellant that the presence
of the eye-witnesses at the time of incident
has not been established beyond doubt.
The present occurrence was unwitnessed
one and the appellant cannot be saddled
just on account of very strong motive or
other incriminating connected evidence.
Had the presence of eye-witnesses been
accepted then the connecting evidence
would have been a_ very _ strong
incriminating corroborative piece of
evidence but since we are of the mind that
the presence of these witnesses at the spot
at the relevant time is doubtful and not
established. Hence it is but natural that the

Abdul Sabooh/* (D.B.) Hon’ble Mr. Justice Ishtiag Ibrahim
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Wiqar Ahmad
-12-

benefit of doubt would flow in favour of
the appellant.”

“Conviction must be founded on
unimpeachable evidence and certainty of guilt” as held
by the Hon’ble Apex Court in its judgment given in the
case of Muhammad Khan and another vs. The State
reported as 1999 SCMR 1220 “hence any doubt that
arises in the prosecution case must be resolved in
favour of the accused.” It was also held therein that it
was imperative for the Court to examine and consider
all the relevant events preceding and leading to the

occurrence so as to arrive at a correct conclusion.

12, In the case in hand, where evidence of
prosecution is deficient in respect of the actual
occurrence of killing of the two deceased, the benefit
of doubt shall naturally go to the appellant, particularly
in circumstances, when such evidence had been
available and could have been gathered during the
course of investigation, but have not been so gathered
and produced before learned trial Court. An adverse
inference may therefore be drawn against the
prosecution. In such circumstances, it cannot be held
that prosecution have been able to prove case against

the accused/appellant beyond reasonable doubt.

Abdul Sabooh/* (D.B.) Hon’ble Mr, Justice Ishtiaq Ibrahim
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Wiqar Ahmad
we
EAN

-13-
13. “In light of what has been discussed above,

we allow the instant appeal, acquit the appellant of the

charges leveled against him by extending him benefit

of doubt. He be released if not required in any other

case. The Murder Reference No. 01-M of 2020 sent by

learned trial Court is answered in negative.

14, These are reasons for our short order of

even date, which read as; |

“For reasons to be recorded later in the
detailed judgment, this appeal i is allowed, the
impugned judgment , dated 26.02.2020
rendered by learned ‘Additional Sessions
Judge-I, Bajaur at Khar, in case DSR dated
29.08.2018 under section (302 P.P.C registered
at P.S Nawagai, District: Bajaur, is set aside
and the appellant-conviet Muhammad Shafig
son of Muhammad Sadiq is acquitted of the
charge leveled against him in the aforesaid
case. He be released forthwith from jail if not
required in any other case. Murder Reference
No. 01-M/2020 is answered in negative.”

Announced
Dt: 25.11.2020
DGE
GE
AbdulSabooh/* —~—~—~—~—~—~—~SC« DB) Hon’ ble Mrr, Justice Ishtiag Ibrahim |

Hon’ble Mr. Justice Wiqar Ahmad

ae

“

*

‘at re a a

as

= we
