JUDGMENT SHEET

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
PESHAWAR

[JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT]

Criminal Appeal No. 41-P/2021

Naveed Daud............. VS.eceeeee The State.
PRESENT;-
For the appellant:- Malik Nasuminallah,
Advocate.
For the State. - Mr. Atif Ali Khan, AAG.
Date of hearing. ......... 09.07. 2021.
JUDGMENT

MUHAMMAD NAEEM ANWAR, J.- On 14.10.2015, Ameer

Khair ul Basher ASI (PW-06) along with other police party had
arranged ‘nakabandi’ at Jamrud Road and was present there
when received information regarding transportation of huge
quantity of narcotic from Jamrud to Peshawar in a motorcar
bearing registration No. 5650/IND, so, acted upon the
information, he started surveillance of the road. At 17.00 hours,
the spotted motorcar appeared which was stopped. Driver of the
motorcar disclosed his name as Naveed Daud (the appellant).
From secret cavities of the motorcar, the police recovered thirty
(30) packets chars, total weighing 36 kilograms, consequently,
a case vide FIR No. 1433, dated 14.10.2015, was registered
against the above named accused at Police Station, Hayatabad.

2. After registration of the case and completion of
investigation, the accused-appellant was sent to the court of
learned Judge, Special Court/MCTC, Peshawar, for trial, who
on its conclusion, convicted and sentenced him to

imprisonment for life with a fine of Rs. 2,00,000/- or in default
thereof to undergo further six month SI with benefit of section
382-B Cr.P.C, vide judgment dated 09.01.2021.

3. The appellant-accused has now challenged the validity
and legality of his conviction and sentences by filing the instant
criminal appeal under section 48 of the Control of Narcotic
Substances Act, 1997, ‘( Act, 1997)’ read with section 410 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, on the ground that not
only there are glaring contradictions in the testimony of the
prosecution’s witnesses creating reasonable doubts as to the
prosecution story but the FSL result is also invalid because the
Government Analyst, who had conducted the test and furnished
his opinion was not qualified in terms of section 35 of the Act,
1997 and rules made thereunder, but these vital aspects of the
case have been ignored by the learned trial court.

4. We have heard arguments of learned counsel for the
appellant and learned AAG appearing on behalf of the State
and perused the record.

5. The allegation against the accused-appellant is that he
on 14.10.2015 was trafficking thirty six (36) k.gs chars in his
motorcar bearing registration No. 5650/IND from Jamrud to
Peshawar but the evidence produced by the prosecution reveals
that neither the motorcar was registered in his name, nor a
driving license was taken into possession from him, thus, it is
repellant to the common sense that without having a driving
license a person would drive a vehicle and that too without
proper documents from Jamrud to Peshawar, which aspect of
the case has created a reasonable doubt in the prosecution case.

There are also material discrepancies in the statements of the
prosecution witnesses which also give a hint that the
prosecution case is not free from doubt, i.e. as per contents of
the FIR, the Murasilla was sent through Samin Ullah constable
to the Police Station for registration of the case, which fact has
also been confirmed by Izhar Ullah Inspector (PW-4), who in
cross examination stated that only Murasilla was handed over
to him and nothing else. Muhammad Zahir (PW-5) was present
with the complainant at the time of recovery and also cited him
as one of the marginal marginal witnesses to the recovery
memo Exh.PW 5/1 has stated in his cross examination that the
complainant after preparing Murasilla and recovery memo,
handed over the same to Tehseen Ullah (Samin Ullah)
constable for onward submission to the Police Station and he
went to the Police Station in a private taxi but testimony of the
above witnesses were contradicted by the complainant when
appeared as PW-6 by stating in his cross examination that he
and Samin Ullah Constable had taken the case property,
Murasilla and accused to the Police Station and handed over the
same in the Police Station. Besides the above, the occurrence,
as per contents of the FIR, had taken place on 14.10.2015 at
17.00 hours (5.00 p.m), report/murasilla was drafted at 17.30
hours, while FIR was chalked out at 17.50 hours (05.50 p.m).
Muhammad Zahir (PW-05) stated in cross examination that
distance between police station and place of nakabandi was two
kilometers. He stated that Constable Tehseen Ullah, who had
taken murasilla to the Police Station, came back to the spot
after thirty minutes before the arrival of the I.O to the spot. He

further stated that the I.O visited the spot after about one hour
and consumed about 30 minutes on the spot, while the I.O
stated in his cross examination that he spent two hours on the
whole spot proceedings. In the last lines of cross examination,
the said PW stated that after 06.00 O’clock he changed his
uniform and had gone to the PP as his duty time was closed at
that time. When FIR was chalked out at 05.50 p.m and after its
registration, it might have been handed over to the I.O at 06.00
p.m for investigation then how he was present at the spot at the
time of arrival of the I.O as according to his statement after
06.00 O’clock he changed his uniform and had gone to the PP
as his duty time was closed at that time. The discrepancies
highlighted above further making the case of the prosecution
suspicious.

6. Likewise, all the three important witnesses of the
prosecution, viz, complainant, I.O and marginal witness to the
recovery memo during the course of recording their statements
before the trial court were oblivious as to departure from the
police station and arrival back to the Police station nor there are
any written diaries in this respect. PW-3, the I.O, stated in his
cross examination that when they left Police Station for official
duty, entries in this respect are made in daily diary, however, he
admitted as correct that the said daily diary is not available on
file. This court in case titled Pir Noroz Ali Shah v. The State

(2019 P.Cr.LJ 457) has held that:

“In order to establish the movement of police
officials through confidence inspiring evidence, the
production of daily diary of the police Station showing the
departure, constitution of raiding team, its members and
subsequent arrival, was a material piece of evidence in

favour of prosecution. Indeed the daily diaries are
maintained under the erstwhile Police Rules, 1934. Under
Rule 28.48 it is mandatory for every police official to
make entry of his departure, arrival and all proceedings
conducted between the intervening period of departure and
arrival. Non-production of the daily diary has caused
serious doubts in the prosecution case regarding the mode

and manner of raid.”
7. Also, PW-3 in his statement stated that he did not
know as to who had accompanied the I.O to the spot. Similarly,
Muhammad Zahir PW-5 stated that the 1.0 was accompanied
by a single constable, however, showed his ignorance about the
name of the said constable. He was also unacquainted as to
whether the I.O had come to the spot in vehicle or by foot. He
stated that the complainant had visited the Police station but he
could not recall the time. He was also unaware that after how
much time the complainant left the spot for Police Station. The
complainant (PW-6) also showed his ignorance on certain
material points. He stated that the I.O had come to the spot but
showed unawareness after how much time he visited the spot.
Even, he could not recall the number of police officials
accompanied by the I.O. He also did not call to mind that as to
which time he returned from the Police station to the spot after
handing over murasilla and case property in the Police Station.
So, the above substantial loopholes appearing in the statements
of the star witnesses of the prosecution, particularly, lack of
knowledge by the PWs on certain realities, which they ought to
have reminisced, lead one to the conclusion that the prosecution
has failed to establish its case against the appellant beyond

reasonable doubt.
8. There is another damaging aspect of the case, which is
the legality and validity of the FSL report relied by the
prosecution. Muhammad Riaz (PW-2) though stated in his
examination in chief that he was handed over parcels No. 1 to
30 yet did not name the person who had handed over the same
to him. He, though, during cross examination stated that the
samples were handed to him by the complainant but there is no
application for sending the samples to the lab. Likewise, as per
record, the occurrence took place on 14.10.2015 while the
samples were delivered in the Lab on 19.10. 2015, after the
delay of about five days, whereas the same were required to
have been sent to the FSL within 72 hours of its seizure as
required by Rule 4(2) of the Control of Narcotic Substances
(Government Analysts) Rules, 2001. Also, the tests on samples
were carried out by the Chemical Examiner, namely,
Mohammad Zeb Khan, who was not qualified to be termed as a
Government Analyst within the meaning of section 35 of the
Control of Narcotic Substances Act, 1997 and the rules framed
thereunder, thus, he was declared so, vide notification dated
05.08.2009, with retrospective effect. When the person who
furnished opinion and analyzing the samples was not qualified
to be termed as a Government Analyst under section 35 of the
Act, 1997 and rules framed thereunder then such report, even if
it be in positive, is of no avail to the prosecution as it cannot be
relied upon.

9. Learned AAG submitted that since the person who
furnished opinion on the samples was not possessing the

prescribed qualification and could not be termed as
Government Analyst in term of Section 35 of the Act, 1997,
therefore, remand of the case back to the trial court is inevitable
in order to get fresh samples from the recovered illegal stuff
and get them examine through Chemical Examiner duly
appointed under section 35 of the Act, 1997 in light of
judgment of this court reported as 2011 P Cr. L J 1203, 2015
MLD 518 and 2015 P.Cr.L J 1108. This argument of the
learned AAG, in our view, has no force because it amounts to
giving the prosecution a chance to fill the lacunas in the report

of FSL. Hon’ble apex court in case titled Khair ul Bashar vs.

the State (2019 S C M R 930) has held that:-

“6. Re-testing of the drug, as argued by the DPG, in case
of a deficient report would amount to giving a premium to
the prosecution for its mistakes and lapses. In any case any
flaw in the case of the prosecution must only benefit the
accused. Sending the alleged drugs for re-testing would be
giving another chance to the prosecution to build its case,
which is not the role or business of the court. Besides,
there is a likelihood that the chain of custody of the alleged

drug is compromised with the passage of time..”
Similarly, in the case of Muhammad Naeem vs. the State
and others (2019 SC 669) the Hon’ble the apex court observed
that:-

The court being a neutral arbiter has to
dispassionately appreciate, appraise, examine and weigh
the evidence placed before: it, rather than by ignoring the
evidence and embarking on a probing journey guided by
emotions, sentiments arid sense of self-styled justice
pegged on the lofty notion of societal reform. In an
adversarial system the role of the judge is that of a neutral
umpire, unruffled by emotions, a judge is to ensure fair
trial between the prosecution and the defence on the basis
of the evidence before it. The judge should not enter the

arena so as to appear that he is taking sides. The court
cannot allow one of the parties to fill lacunas in their
evidence or extend a second chance to a party to improve
their case or the quality of the evidence tendered by them.
Any such step would tarnish the objectivity and
impartiality of the court which is its hallmark. Such
favoured intervention, no matter how well-meaning strikes
at the very foundations of fair trial, which is now
recognized as a fundamental right under Article 10-A of

our Constitution.

6. In the present case the direction of the High Court for
obtaining fresh samples of the alleged intoxicating
substance and preparing a fresh report of the Chemical
Examiner amounts to granting the prosecution a premium
on its failure to put up a proper case in the first instance.
Such judicial intervention is opposed to the adversary
principle and offensive to the fundamental right of fair
trial and due process guaranteed under the Constitution.
see Dildar v. State; Painda Gul v. State and State v. Amjad
Ali.'® The High Court has travelled beyond its lawful
powers under section 423(1)(a) Cr.P.C. and has in fact
directed to conduct re-investigation or further investigation
of the case, which is not permissible under the law. Even
otherwise, calling for fresh examination of the intoxicating
substance at the appellate stage after all these years may
frustrate the settled law as to safe custody and safe
transmission of the recovered substance making the report

of the chemical examiner suspect and unreliable.
Again, in the case titled Qaiser Javed Khan vs. the
State (PLD 2020 Supreme Court 57) the august Supreme

Court of Pakistan has held that:-

“

Once the above three requirements under Rule 6 are
contained in the Report of the Government Analyst, any
ambiguity therein may be resolved by the Trial Court by
exercising its power under Proviso to section 510, Cr.P.C.
The said provision states that the Court may, if it considers
necessary in the interest of justice, summon and examine
the person by whom such report has been made. Therefore,

the Trial Court while examining the said Report has the
power to summon the Government Analyst in case there is
any ambiguity in the said Report and seek clarification
thereof. This clarification can only be based on the existing
record of the Government Analyst and does not mean to
allow the Government Analyst to conduct a fresh test or
prepare another Report, for that would amount to giving
the prosecution a chance of filling the gaps and lacunas in

the Report.”

10. Thus, in view of the above stated reasons, it would not
be safe to maintain the conviction and sentences of the
appellant on such a scanty evidence and invalid report of FSL
and that too for the offence carrying capital punishment,
therefore, for the reasons discussed above, by extending benefit
of doubt, the instant appeal is allowed, consequently, the
impugned judgment of conviction rendered by the learned
Judge Special court is set aside and, therefore, the appellant is
acquitted of the charge levelled against him. He be released
forthwith if not required in any other case.

Above are the reasons of short order of even date.

Announced.
09.07.2021
*M Zafral P.S* JUDGE

JUDGE

DB ( Hon’able Mr. Justice Syed Arshad Ali and
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Naeem Anwar.
