Judgment Sheet
PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, PESHAWAR.
(JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT)

Cr.A.No.1178-P/2021.
JUDGMENT

Date of hearing = ------ 08.11.2022.
Appellants by --- Mr.Rahat Ali Knan, Advocate.
State by --- Mr.Niaz Muhammad, A.A.G.
Father of the complainant.

S M ATTIQUE SHAH, J:- Through this
single judgment we shall also decide the
connected criminal appeal bearing
No.1183-P/2021 titled “Yaseen Vs. The
State, etc.” as both have arisen from the
same judgment dated 09.12.2021 of the
learned Judge, Child Protection Court,
Mardan delivered in case FIR No.172 dated
11.03.2019 registered under sections
377/511/34 PPC read with section 53 of the
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Child Protection and
Welfare Act, 2010 at police station Katlang,
Mardan whereby the appellants have been
convicted under section 377 PPC and
sentenced to imprisonment for life with fine
of Rs.10,00,000/- each or in default
whereof to further suffer simple

imprisonment for six months. They have

also been convicted under section 377-B
PPC and sentenced to O07 years
imprisonment with a fine of Rs.10,00,000/-
each. In default of such payment, they shall
further undergo six months SI. They have
further been convicted under section 53 of
the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Child Protection
and Welfare Act, 2010, and sentenced to
undergo 14 years RI with a fine of
Rs.10,00,000/- each or in default whereof
to further suffer 06 months imprisonment,
however, benefit of section 382-B Cr.P.C
was extended to them.

2. As per the prosecution case, on
10.03.2019 at Asar vela time complainant
Sudais (P.W-4) aged about 10 years in the
company of his father and cousin Salman
aged about 11 years, reported the matter to
the local police to the effect that on eventful
day, after performing Asar prayer in
Madrassa, he and his cousin Salman were
going to their house and when reached the
spot, there the accused-appellant Imad
caught hold of him while co-appellant

Yaseen caught hold of his cousin Salman
/)

and took them to the sugarcane field where
his cousin Salman rescued himself and
succeeded in decamping from the spot
whereas he was subjected to sodomy by
both the appellants.

3. After completion of investigation,
complete challan against the appellants
was submitted before the learned trial
Court, which indicted them for the offence
to which they pleaded not guilty. To prove
its case, prosecution examined 08
witnesses, whereafter statements of the
accused were recorded wherein they
professed their innocence. After conclusion
of trial, the learned trial court while
appreciating the evidence in its wisdom
found the appellants guilty of the charge
and whilst recording their convictions
sentenced them as mentioned above,
whereagainst they have filed the instant
and connected appeals.

4. Learned counsel for the
appellants contended that the appellants
are innocent and have falsely been

charged in the case with mala fide; that the
prosecution has failed to prove its case
against the appellants beyond reasonable
doubt; that the appellants have been
convicted by the learned trial Court only on
the ground that the offence is heinous in
nature, however, no trustworthy,
unimpeachable and cogent evidence is
available on file to connect them with the
commission of the offence; that medical
evidence is not in line with the statement of
the victim and that there are glaring
contradictions in the statements of the
PWs. He concluded that the grounds
prevailed with the learned trial court for
convicting and sentencing the appellants
are based on conjectures and surmises
and thus devoid of merits, hence, in such
circumstances, the appellants/convicts
deserve acquittal.

5. On the other hand, learned
Additional Advocate General supported the
impugned judgment and contended that all
the material available on case file
reasonably connect the accused-appellants

with the commission of offence; that the
prosecution has successfully proved its
case against the appellants/convicts; that
the offence is of moral turpitude and
heinous in nature, which affects the whole
society, therefore, such like acts of
inhuman nature should be discouraged by
imposing exemplary punishment on the
accused; that appellants/convicts are
directly charged by the complainant in his
report; that the victim who is minor aged
about 10 years but was examined before
the Court and during cross-examination
nothing favorable has been extracted from
his mouth by the defence and that the
accused-appellants have failed to prove
any previous ill-will/ma/a fide on part of the
prosecution. He concluded that the learned
trial Court has rightly convicted the
appellants and prayed for dismissal of the
appeals in hand.

6. Heard. Record perused.

7. It is the case of prosecution that
the appellants forcibly took the
complainant/victim Sudais and his cousin,

Salman to a sugarcane field while they
were coming back to their homes after
performing the Asar prayer in Madrassa
and, thereafter committed sodomy with
complainant Sudais while Salman
remained successful in escaping therefrom.
During trial on 09.12.2021, the complainant
appeared before the court and recorded his
statement as P.W-4. In his examination-in-
chief, he straightforwardly narrated the
entire episode totally in line with his initial
report (Ex.PA). He was subjected to
lengthy cross-examination by the defence
in a very testing and taxing manner even
then nothing could be extracted from his
mouth in favour of the appellants. Besides,
despite being of tender age complainant/
victim withstood the test of cross-
examination, which reflects that whatever
he stated before the court was truth and
nothing else. P.W-5 Salman who is the
cousin of the complainant also supports the
prosecution version by stating that he along
with complainant Sudais was coming
towards the house. When they reached the

spot, the accused Imad caught hold of
Sudais while accused Yaseen hold his
hand and they were taken towards the
sugarcane field. Meanwhile, he succeeded
in rescuing himself from the clutches of
accused Yaseen and escaped. Both the
accused took Sudais to the sugarcane field
and committed sodomy with him. The site
plan (Ex.PB) was also prepared on his
pointation. The careful assessment of the
testimony of these PWs would reveal that
the same is straightforward, coherent, and
confidence-inspiring. Further, at the time of
incident, the complainant/victim or any of
his family members was having no ill will,
grudge, malice, or ulterior motive against
the appellants for their false implication in
the case. The father of the complainant
(PW-6) has also supported the prosecution
version and there is nothing in his
statement to discard his testimony and to
believe that he was having any axe to grind
against the appellants before the
occurrence. The prosecution version has
also been corroborated and supported by

the medical evidence furnished by Dr.
Muhammad Shahab- (P.W-3), who
examined the victim and opined that there
were bruises around his anus vide his
examination report (Ex.P.W.3/1). It is
settled that DNA profiling is not essential
for maintaining the conviction of an
accused under the charge of rape and
sodomy. PLD 2020 S C 313 FAROOQ
AHMAD V. THE STATE. Still, the
prosecution has proved through the
forensic test (EX-PW.7/9) the commission
of sodomy with the complainant/victim. PW-
3 has also examined the accused-
appellants and confirmed that they are
capable of performing sexual intercourse
through examination report (Ex.P.W.3/2).

8. Coming to the contention of
learned counsel for the appellants that the
prosecution has failed to produce any
independent witness of the occurrence,
suffice it to state that the statement of the
victim in such like offences itself is
sufficient for maintaining conviction if the
same is independent, unbiased, coherent,

cogent and straightforward to establish the
charge against the accused. Shakeel and
5 others V. The State (PLD 2010 SC 47).
As of now, it is well settled that the crime of
sodomy and rape is usually committed in
private and hardly any independent witness
can be produced in such like cases.
Therefore, courts do not insist upon
producing direct evidence to corroborate
the testimony of victim if the same is found
confidence-inspiring then even the sole
testimony of a victim is sufficient for
conviction. It is also well settled that the
testimony of a victim in such like cases
stands on a much higher pedestal than the
other offences as in the case of sodomy
and rape the victims suffer severe mental
trauma psychologically and emotionally and
it becomes difficult for the victim to
overcome the same. Atif Zarif Vs. The
State (PLD 2021 SC 550). Coming towards
the alleged delay so occurred in reporting
the matter in hand suffice it to state that in
such like cases the victim and their families
are always reluctant to come forward to

promptly report the matter due to the
10

trauma they had suffered besides a
perception of shame and dishonor of the
victim as well as his entire family, therefore,
the delay in such like cases is not material.
Zahid Vs. The State (2020 SCMR 590).
Moving towards the contention of learned
counsel representing the appellants that
both P.W-4 and P.W-5 had not made any
hue and cry while being pulled to the
sugarcane field by the accused-appellants,
true, that no such hue and cry had been
made by the PWs but it is the matter of
evidence that both the accused-appellants
were co-villagers of the victim and P.W-5
and were well known to them, therefore,
that might be the reason of their not making
any hue and cry. Zahid Vs. The State
(2020 SCMR 50). Given, that both the
P.Ws i.e. P.W-4 and P.W-5 were minors at
the time of offence having the age of 10
and 11 years respectively, however, their
testimony is straightforward, coherent and
confidence inspiring, therefore, the same is
admissible for maintaining the conviction of

the appellants.
9. From the reappraisal of the
above-referred evidence produced by the
prosecution, it can be inferred without any
reasonable doubt that the accused-
appellants have committed sodomy upon
the minor victim. All the PWs including the
doctor were subjected to lengthy cross-
examination by the defence counsel but
nothing fatal to the case of the prosecution
could be squeezed out from their mouth, so
the statements of all the witnesses are
believable and worthy credence. Further,
not a single question was put to the victim
(P.W-4) to show that the accused-
appellants were not the real culprit.
Moreover, no member of society, in our
estimation, would choose to lose the
honour of his family, particularly of a child,
by falsely implicating an innocent person as
the victim of rape and sodomy carries the
stigma of such offence throughout his
entire life is our part of the region. Thus the
findings recorded by the learned trial court

are based on sound reasons.
12

10. Now adverting to the quantum of
sentence awarded to the
appellants/convicts by the learned trial
court. According to their card of arrest, the
accused-appellants were arrested on the
same day i.e. 11.03.2019 and at that time
the age of accused-appellant Imad was
22/23 years whereas that of accused-
appellant Yaseen 19/20 years. Thus on the
quantum of sentence too the learned trial
court has committed no_ illegality by
recording convictions of the appellants.

11. In view thereof, we are of the
considered view that the impugned
judgment is based on correct appreciation
of case material, which needs no
interference by this Court. Therefore, the
instant appeals, being bereft of any merit,

are hereby dismissed.

CHIEF JU.

Announced. y rn“ oe Tt
Dt.08/1 1/2022. DGE

HON’BLE MR.JUSTICE QAISER RASHID KHAN, C.J &
HON’BLE MR.JUSTICE S. M, ATTIQUE SHAH,

CAKKHAN Court Setratery)
