& -1-

»

~« JUDGMENT SHEET

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT.

Criminal Revision No.58-P/2018

JUDGMENT

Date of hearing : 11" October, 2023
Petitioner : By Barrister Wagar Ali Khan.
(Fazal Wahab etc)

Respondent : By Ms. Shakeela Begum, AAG.
(State)

KREKKK KK KKKKKKKKKKEE

S. M. ATTIQUE SHAH, J.- Petitioners, through the

instant criminal revision filed under section 439 of the CrPC,
have called in question the judgment / order dated 02.04.2018
of the learned Special Judge, Anti-Corruption (Provincial)
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Peshawar, whereby their application to
consolidate the charge as required under section 234 read with

section 239 CrPC has been dismissed.

2. The gist of the arguments of the learned counsel
for the petitioners is that when the date of occurrence, date of
report, registration of all the three FIRs and the complainant
therein are one and the same being the result of a common
open inquiry and technical report and; also committed within
the period of twelve months, then in that eventuality, the
charge of the petitioners is liable to be consolidated and they

should be tried jointly in all the FIRs as required under section

-2-

234 read with section 239 CrPC, which fact has totally been
ignored by the learned trial court while dismissing their

application through the impugned judgment / order.

3. The main thrust of the arguments of the learned
AAG is that the basic ingredients which are necessary for
claiming joinder of charge and to be tried jointly as envisaged
under the ibid sections of law are totally missing to the case of
the petitioners insofar as committing the crime in different
occasions is concerned, which fact has properly been
appreciated by the learned trial court while declining their

such request.

4. Heard. Record perused.

5. Before proceed, it would be more apt to
reproduce herein below the relevant sections of law i.e.
sections 222, 234 & 239 CrPC for ease of reference, which
read as under:-

S.222.Particulars as to time, place and person.(1) The
charge shall contain such particulars as to the time
and place of the alleged offence, and the person (if
any) against whom; or the thing (if any) in respect of
which, it was committed, as are reasonably sufficient
to give the accused notice of the matter with which he

is charged;

(2) When the accused is charged with criminal breach
of trust or dishonest misappropriation of money, it
shall be sufficient to specify the gross sum in respect of

which the offence is alleged to have been committed,
-3-

and the dates between which the offence is alleged to
have been committed, without specifying particular
items or exact dates, and the charge so framed shall be
deemed to be a charge of one offence within the

meaning of section 234;

Provided that the time included between the

first and last of such dates shall not exceed one year.

S.234.Three offences of same kind within one year
may be charged together.) When a person is
accused of more offences than one of the same kind
committed within the space of twelve months from the
first to the last of such offences, whether in respect of
the same person or not, he may be charged with, and
tried at one trial for, and number of them not

exceeding three;

(2) Offences are of the same kind when they are
punishable with the same amount of punishment under
the same section of the Pakistan Penal Code or of any

special or local law;

Provided that, for the purpose of this section, an
offence punishable under section 379 of the Pakistan
Penal Code shall be deemed to be an offence of the
same kind as an offence punishable under section 380
of the said Code, and that an offence punishable under
any section of the Pakistan Penal Code or of any
special or local law shall be deemed to be an offence
of the same kind as an attempt to commit such offence,

when such an attempt is an offence;

S.239.What persons may be charged jointly. The
following persons may be charged and tried together,

namely;
-4-

(a) persons accused of the same offence committed

in the courses of the same transaction;

(b) persons accused of an offence and persons
accused of abetment, or of an attempt to commit
such offence;

(c) persons accused of more than one offence of the
same kind, within the meaning of section 234
committed by them jointly within the period of

twelve months;

(d) persons accused of different offences committed

in the course of the same transaction;

(e) persons accused of an offence which includes
theft, extortion or criminal misappropriation, and
persons accused of receiving or retaining, or
assisting in the disposal or concealment of,
property possession of which is alleged to have
been transferred by any such offence committed by
the first named persons, or of abetment of or

attempting to commit any such last named offence;

(f) persons accused of offences under sections 411
and 414 of the Pakistan Penal Code or either of
those sections in respect of stolen property the
possession of which has been transferred by one

offence; and

(g) persons accused of any offence under Chapter
XII of the Pakistan Penal Code relating to
counterfeit coin, and persons accused of any other
offence under the said Chapter relating to the same
coin, or of abetment of or attempting to commit any

such offence;
-5-

and the provisions contained in the former
part of this Chapter shall, so far as may be, apply

to all such charges.

6. The object and purpose of section 234 CrPC is
that an accused may be charged with and tried for a maximum
of three offences at one trial if the same were allegedly
committed during a period of twelve months from the first to
the last of that kind of offences notwithstanding for the
offence of criminal breach of trust or dishonest
misappropriation of money, only gross amount and the dates
between which the offence is alleged to have been committed
would be sufficient to specify without mentioning specific
items or exact dates as defined in section 222 CrPC. In the
event of involving of more than one accused in multiple
offences of the same kind committed by them jointly within
the period, as defined in section 234 CrPC, all of them may be
charged jointly and tried together within the meaning of
section 239 CrPC. Combine reading of all the ibid sections of
law reflects that persons accused who commit crime / offence
jointly in the same transaction and the basic elements of
continuity of intention and action are there, they are to be tried

jointly.

Such legal proposition / issue was tackled by the

Hon’ ble Supreme Court of Pakistan in the case of Nadir Shah
-6-

ys. State (1980 SCMR 402) and observed in the following

manner”

Thus while there is a limitation of maximum
three offences/items which can be combined
under section 234, there is no such limitation
with regard to offence of criminal breach of
trust provided for in subsection(2) of section
222. Therefore, subject to the other conditions,
if a person is charged with having committed
several offences of criminal breach of trust,
within a period of one year, they can all be
combined into one charge. But the provision
being only an enabling one, it will not be
necessary to do so in all the cases; because the
general rule in this behalf is, as provided in
section 233, Cr.PC, that for every distinct
offence there shall be a separate charge and the
same shall be tried separately, except, of course
when the Code itself permits otherwise. This
provision is based on a salutary principle that
when each charge is tried separately, there is
much less apprehension of prejudice to the
accused as compared to a trial wherein several
offences are combined together. In the present
case, it appears that the provisions contained in
section 233, Cr.P.C. were followed and the
enabling provisions contained in section 222
(2), Cr.P.C. and/or section 234, Cr.P.C. were
not made use of. We agree with the learned
counsel for the State that in the circumstances
of the case, if the learned trial Court thought, of
course, before the pronouncement of the
judgment as provided in section 227, Cr.P.C.,
that combination of the charges would help the
-7-

accused in facilitating his defence, he could
have altered the charge/s and proceeded
accordingly, as provided in section 228, Cr.P.C
and the sections next following. He could not
have made the so called defect as the ground
for acquitting the accused. The High Court was

fully justified in correcting the error.
The same view / wisdom was also followed by the

Hon’ble apex court in another case reported as Shah Nawaz

ys. State (1992 SCMR 1583) and observed as under:-

Legal position, correctly and aptly stated in the
case of Nadir Shah, supra, by the Supreme
Court is that while three offences/items are
permitted to be combined under one charge as
contemplated by section 234, Cr.P.C. such
limitation is not applicable in the case of
criminal breach of trust in which several
offences committed within a period of one year,
are permitted to be combined under one charge
as is allowed under section 222(2), Cr.P.C.
Another rule laid down is that errors committed
in stating either offence or particulars of charge
or omissions in such behalf are not material
unless accused is misled by such errors or

omissions and failure of justice is occasioned.
Regarding such proposition, way back in the year, 1932,
the Calcutta High Court in the case of Negendra Nath Sen vs.

Emperor (A.ILR 1932 Calcutta 486) held as under:-

Under Section 234 a person may be charged
and tried at one trial for three offences of the
same kind committed within a space of 12

months. Therefore three offences of criminal
-§-

breach of trust may be tried together and three
offences for falsification of accounts may be
tried together. But an offence of criminal
breach of trust is not of the same kind as an
offence of falsification of accounts. Therefore
the trial of two or more charges of criminal
breach of trust cannot legally be joined with
two or more charges of falsification of
accounts: see the case of Raman Behari Das v.
Emperor ALR. 1915 Cal.296 in which it was
held that a joinder of three charges under
Section 409 with three under Section 477-A,
relating to different transactions, is not
warranted by any of the exceptions provided in
the Code and is illegal and that a misjoinder is
absolutely fatal to the trial.

7. Seen the ibid provisions of law in juxtaposition
with the judgments (supra), it is crystal clear that when the
offence is committed by the persons accused jointly in the
same transaction and the necessary ingredient of continuity of
intention and action are available / present, then their joint trial
of more than one cases is permissible in terms of the ibid

provisions of law, discussed therein.

8. Now adverting to the merits of the case. The
record depicts that way back in the year, 2011, tenders for
inviting bids were floated by the C&W Department, district
Nowshera through publications in daily ‘Express’ Peshawar
on 05.03.2011 & 13.03.2011 for the repair, rehabilitation and

reconstruction of flood affected food grain godowns at NRC
9-

Azakhel and PRC Nowshera and thereafter task was assigned
to contractors. However, pursuant to complaints from the
locality regarding the use of substandard material in the
reconstruction work, an open inquiry was initiated by the
Anti-Corruption department way back in the year, 2015
against the concerned officials of C&W Department, District
Nowshera and after conclusion of the same, it surfaced that
due to use of substandard material in the desired
reconstruction work, huge loss was caused to the government
exchequer, for which, the petitioners along with others were
held responsible. Pursuant thereof, three different FIRs
bearing No.13, 14, 15 of the same date i.e. 28.09.2015 under
section 409 PPC read with section 5(2) of the PC Act have
been registered against them. The petitioners were arrested
therein, however, released on bail. The prosecution submitted
separate challans against them in the learned trial court and
accordingly, they were summoned to be charge sheeted.
However, the petitioners filed an application under section 234
read with section 239 CrPC for joinder of charge in all the
three FIRs and to be tried jointly, which was dismissed by the
learned trial court vide the impugned judgment / order dated
02.04.2018. Being aggrieved, the petitioners have filed the
instant criminal revision.

9. It is evident from the record that the desired

reconstruction / repair / rehabilitation work was completed
Pyy

-10-

within period of twelve months and the entire payments were
also made to the contractors within such period. Moreover, all
the three FIRs are the outcome of one and the same inquiry
and; technical report for the same offence of criminal breach
of trust against the same persons i.e. the petitioners who are
the officials of the C&W department while the complainant
being official of Anti-Corruption Establishment is also the
same nevertheless the prosecution split up the case into
different FIRs / cases. It is the plain language of section 222
CrPC that when period between the dates of the first and the
last items does not exceed one year, then charge in respect of
all the items shall be deemed to be charge of one offence
within the meaning of section 234 CrPC. Bifurcation of the
items would definitely prejudice the case of an accused. As
such, the case of the petitioners is exclusively covered under
sub-section(2) of section 222 CrPC and their charge is to be
consolidated and they are to be tried jointly in all the FIRs as
required under section 234 read with section 239 CrPC. Being
so, this court understands that the petitioners have succeeded
in making out a case for the interference of this court in its
revisional jurisdiction under section 439 of the CrPC. In this
view of the matter, this court is left with no option but to allow
this revision petition.

10. For the reasons discussed above, this court admits

and allows this revision petition, set asides the impugned
ae

-11-

judgment / order dated 02.04.2018 of the learned trial court
and in turn accepts the application of the petitioners for
joinder of charge in all the three ibid FIRs with the direction to
the learned trial court to proceed in the matter accordingly.

Announced

11. 10. 2023 JUDGE —

(Fayaz) (S.B) Justice S M Attique Shah, HJ
