JUDGMENT SHEET
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
D.L.KAAN BENCH
(Judicial Department)

Cr.Rev.No.19-D/2023 with
Cr.Mise.No.311-D/2023

Muhammad Ibrahim and 05 others
Versus.
The State and another
JUDGMENT

For petitioner: Mr. Saif-ur-Rahman Khan,
Advocate.

For respondents: | Nemo (motion case).

Date ofhearing: 05.9.2023.

aK
Dr. Khurshid Iqbal, J.-
1. The subject and the connected

Cr.Rev.No.20-D/2023 are directed against a
common order dated 17.6.2023 of the learned trial
Court. These are being disposed of by this single
opinion. In the background of the subject petitions
lies an incident of harassment and criminal
intimidation Dr Tayyaba Alam has alleged against
the petitioners in her report on which a criminal case
has been registered against them and they are
currently on trial. Dr Tayyaba Alam is a medical
doctor. She is serving in the District Headquarter
Hospital in Dera Ismail Khan. The harassment she
has alleged is in the form of Ghag (Pashto: literally,
a voice; a pronouncement, a declaration; a
warning)—an abhorrent social practice which is a
public declaration by a young male (usually
unmarried) of a preferential claim to get the hand of

@ young unmarried woman in marriage. In other

b/e
-3

words, it is a warning both to the targeted woman
and her family as well as to the public at large to
hold back from getting her married to anybody else.
In the year 2013, Ghag was criminalized by our
Provincial Assembly through the Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa Ghag Act. Its section 2 defines Ghag

in the following words:

(b) “Ghag” means a custom, usage,
tradition or practice whereby a
person forcibly demands or claims
the hand of a woman, without her
own or her parents' or wali’s will and
free consent, by making an open
declaration either by words spoken
or written or by visible
representation or by an imputation,
innuendo, or insinuation, directly or
indirectly, in a locality or before
public in general that the woman
shall stand engaged to him or any
other particular man and that no
other man shall make a marriage
proposal to her or marry her,
threatening her parents and other
relatives to refrain from giving her
hand in marriage to any other
person, and shall also include
obstructing the marriage of such
woman in any other manner pursuant
to such declaration; and

Explanation.-For the purpose of this
definition, ghag shall also include
“awaz”, “noom” or any word or
phrase, denoting such declaration.
2. The specific facts of the case are that
the complainant and her sister Engr. Faiqa Mahboob
submitted a written application to the District Police
Officer for registration of a criminal case against the
petitioners. A copy of the complaint available on the
record reflects that the parties are close relatives. A
dispute has arisen between them over the divorce

their brother has given to his wife who was their

sd

maternal first cousin. Two other women from
amongst their paternal cousins are also stated to
have married in the family. In this background, the
complaint further shows, the petitioners allegedly
claim that father of the complainant had promised to
give his daughters’ hands in marriage to them. They
allegedly run after the complainant and her sister
with a claim of marriage (Ghag). The matter was
referred to a dispute resolution forum. The proposed
witnesses were present in the dispute resolution

process.

3. Arguments of learned counsel for the

petitioner heard. Record perused.

4, So far, 03 witnesses have been
examined. Another witness Qari Amanullah has
been partially examined. Others including the
complainant are yet to be examined. The
complainant submitted an application under section
540 Cr.PC to the trial court to summon three other
persons Hafeez-ur-Rahman, Noman Ullah Khan
Gandapur and Maulana Waheed Kundi as her
witnesses. The reason she showed, as noted above,
was that the aforesaid persons were present in
certain mediation proceedings on 29/05/2022 to
resolve the dispute. The proposed witnesses were
not examined under section 161 Cr.PC during the
investigation of the case. The trial court has allowed
the application. Simultaneously, the petitioners
sought their acquittal under section 265-K, Cr.PC,
contending that the charge is groundless and there is
no likelihood of their conviction even if the
remaining evidence is recorded. The trial court has
allowed the complainant’s application and dismissed

the petitioners’ application. So, the issue here is that

-4-

whether the trial court has correctly applied the
letter and spirit of sections 540 and 265-K, Cr.PC.
Obviously, both the applications are substantially

interdependent.

35 The principle argument of Advocate
Saif-ur-Rehman Khan, appearing for the petitioners,
was that the proposed witnesses were not associated
in the investigation and they were not examined
under section 161, Cr,PC. He maintained that the
defence couldn’t be taken by surprise right in the
middle of the trial to come to know about certain
evidence of which it has had no notice at the
commencement of the trial. He next argued that
there is no charge against the petitioners even on the
strength of whatever evidence has been brought on
the record, which warrants their acquittal at this

stage.

6. The text of section 540 Cr.PC reads as

under:

(1) Any Court may, at any stage of
any inquiry, trial or other proceeding
under this code, summon any person
as a witness, or examine any person
in attendance, though not summoned
as a witness, or re-call and re-
examine any person already
examined and (2) the Court shall
summon and examine or re-call and
re-examine any such person if his
evidence appears to it essential to the
just decision of the case (numbers
supplied).

7. The jurisprudence on the subject
provision developed by our higher courts is
expansive. The first part is discretionary, the second,

obligatory. The court may in its discretion (a)

summon any person as a witness, (b) examine any
ofS

person present before it, and (c) recall and re-
examine any person already examined. The court
has vast power under the subject provision.
However, if the just decision of a case demands, it is
obligatory on the court to summon and examine or
re-examine or recall and re-examine any person as a
witness. In the leading case of Muhammad Azam!
(1984), the Supreme Court has comprehensively
discussed the subject provision. The case pertained
to the trial on the charge of the offence of Zina or
zina-bil-jabr liable to tazir punishable under section
(10)3) of the Offence of Zina (Enforcement of
Haudood) Ordinance (VII of 1979). The Court ruled
that given the fact that the victim of the offence was
a minor, certain evidence of her age was essential
and that the trial Court was under a duty to re-
summon and re-examine her under the second part
of section 540, Cr.PC in order to discover truth
about the validity of the marriage of the victim. Two
other aspects the Court discussed in details are:
firstly, the rule of “avoidance to fill gaps” and
secondly, the meaning of the words “appears to it”
used in second/obligatory part of section 540 Cr.PC.
As regards the first one, the Court observed that the
second part of the provision:

“does not admit of any such
qualification. Instead, even if the
action thereunder is of the type
mentioned, the Court shall act in
accordance with the dictates of law.
In fact, the Court has no jurisdiction
in this behalf. It is obligatory on it to
admit evidence thereunder if it is for
the just decision of the case.” [p.
121]

Adverting to the second aspect, the Court offered

the following interpretation:

* Muhammad Azam v. Muhammad Iqbal, PLD 1984 SC_95.

8.

Bs

“The use of the expression “appears
to it” in the second part of section
540 gives ample indication that even
when it is not possible to give a
conclusive verdict with regard to!the
item of evidence being essential or
otherwise, yet it must in any case at
least “appear” to the Court that it is
essential, before taking action under
the said part of section 540. And: for
that matter as observed earlier, it
would not be necessary for the trial
Court to hold a separate inquiry so as
to reach a conclusion whether an
item of evidence is essential for the
just decision of the case. It would be
enough if it appears so to the Court
from any material or inference from
the material including that which is
already available to the Court in any
form—admitted evidence or material
otherwise lying on the judicial .and
other files before it.” [p.123]

Another aspect that may be called the

third one the Court discussed was that the language

of the second part of the provision is also supported

by the language of section 165 of the Evidence Act
(Article 161 of the Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984).

For quick reading, the Article is reproduced as

under:

Judge's power to put questions or
order production: The Judge may, in
order to discover or to obtain proper
proof of relevant facts, ask any
question he places, in any form, at
any time, of any witness, or of the
parties about any fact relevant or
irrelevant, and may order the
production of any document or
thing; and neither the parties nor
their agents shall be entitled to make
any objection to any such question or
order, nor, without the leave of the
Court, to cross-examine any witness
upon any answer given in reply to
any such question:

Provided that the Judgment must be
based upon facts declared by this
Order to be relevant, and duly
proved.

Provided also that this Article shall
not authorise any Judge to compel
any witness to answer any question
or to produce any document which
such witness would be entitled to
refuse to answer or produce under
Articles 4 to 14, both inclusive, if the
question were asked or the document
were called for by the adverse party;
nor shall the Judge ask any question
which it would be improper for any
other person to ask under Article 143
or 144; nor shall be dispensed with
primary evidence of any document,
except in the cases hereinbefore
excepted,

The Court reasoning is as follows:

If the power under section 165 is so
wide as sometimes even to go
beyond what is conferred by section
540 then it would not be proper to
assume any artificial limitations on
the exercise of one or the other
power and they have to be treated as
supplementary to each other.”

[p.124]
9. The above discussed case has been
widely cited and relied upon, for example, in
Muhammad Aslam alias Accha’ (1984); Mehrzad
Khan" (1991); Syed Saeed Muhammad Shah?
(1993); and Pervaiz Ahmad® (1998). It may be

helpful to study more recent cases.

? The Court referred to the Indian cases of Jamatraj Kewalji Govani
vy. State of Maharashtra, AIR 1968 SC 178; and Ragunandan vy.
State of U.P., AIR 1974SC 463.

+ Muhammad Aslam alias Accha and others v. The State, 1984
SCMR 353.

+ Mehrzad Khan v. The State, PLD 1991 SC 430.

5 Syed Saeed Muhammad Shah and another v. The State, 1993
SCMR 550.

6 Pervaiz Ahmed v. Munir Ahmed and another (1998 SCMR 326)
10.

-8-

The reason that the court has full

power is—as was held in Mujahid alias Ghulam

Shabir’

11.

(2018) —,

“(T]o find out the truth to render a
judgment in accordance with canons
of justice. It cannot just sit idle as a
timorous soul, but has to exercise all
the enabling provisions under the
law including section 540, Cr.PC, to
discover the truth.”

Ordinarily, two objections are raised to

an application under section 540 Cr.PC: firstly,

submission of application at a belated stage; and

secondly, an effort to fill lacunae (“avoidance to fill

the gaps” rules discussed above). These aspects

were considered by the Supreme Court in
Muhammad Yaqoob® (2001). The Court held that:

me

12,

formal application is necessary. In Nawabzada Shah

“Calling of additional evidence
under section 540 Cr.PC is not
always conditional on defence or
prosecution making an application
for this purpose. It is duty of the
court to do complete justice between
the parties, carelessness and
ignorance of one party or other or
delay that may result in conclusion
of the case should not be a hindrance
in achieving object of doing
complete justice by allowing
additional evidence.”

The case law also reveals that no

Zain Bugti’ (2013), it was held:

For the purposes of section 540
Cr.PC the Court even without any
formal application from the
prosecution or accused, could
summon any person as witness or
examine any person in attendance as

” Mujahid alias Ghulam Shabir v.The State, 2019 P Cr.LJ 1701
[Sindh (Larkana Bench).

The State v. Muhanimad Yaqoob and others, 2001 SCMR 308.
° Nawabzada Shah Zain Bugti and others v. The State , PLD 2013

S.C 160.
-9-

a witness or recall and re-examine
any person already examined.
13. The provision aims at serving justice
at all costs. To this end, it empowers the court to
record evidence of any witness whether already in
the list of a party or not and even to re-record
evidence of any witness already recorded. The
power neither in terms of judicial conscience is
fettered, nor is limited to any stage or kind of
proceedings, which the court may invoke without
looking for an application by a party. If at all, a
party may move an application at any stage, it is
sufficient if it appears to the Court that the proposed
evidence is necessary for the just decision of the
case. To this sole end, the usual argument of
opposite party that the proposed evidence is sought
to fill lacuna shall not be seen as a hindrance. The
only condition, however, is that the court should
consider it necessary for the just decision of the case
so as to find out the truth, which of course, it shall

exercise in good faith.

14. In the prime interest of justice and
keeping in view the peculiar facts and
circumstances, the aforesaid witnesses seem to be
material witnesses. Their examination would not
prejudice any party as equal opportunity of cross-
examination would be provided to them. The mere
fact that they were not examined under section 161
Cr.PC is also not a hindrance. On the face of the
record, the case relates to an offence against women,
who deserve a proper opportunity to produce
evidence in support of their case as a matter of right.
Indeed, the evidence of the proposed witnesses

appears to be essential to the just decision of the

fe
4po4

-10-

case. Both the petitions are thus dismissed.
However, this judgment shall have no bearing on the

merits of the case.

Announced.
Dt:05.9.2023.
dmran/* JU:

{S.B)
Hon'ble Mfr. Justice Dr. Khurshid Iqbal

