IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,

D.IL.KHAN BENCH
(Judicial Department)

Cr. MBA No.129-D/2018

Hizbullah
Vs
The State and one other

JUDGMENT

For petitioner Mr. Ahmad Ali Khan, Advocate

For respondents Mr. Saif ur Rehman Khan, Advocate

Mr. Adnan Ali, Assistant Advocate
General

Date ofhearing: 17.5.2018

SHAKEEL AHMAD, J.-_ Through the instant criminal
miscellaneous bail petition No.129-D of 2018, the
petitioner Hizbullah son of Abdur Raheem resident of
Daraban, district D.I.Khan who is detained in crime
No.233 dated 25.12.2014, registered under sections
302/324/148/149 PPC read with 15-A.A at police station
Daraban, D.I.Khan applied for post arrest bail in the Court
of learned Additional Sessions Judge-III, D.I.Khan on the
ground of statutory delay, but his prayer was declined by
the learned Additional Sessions Judge-III, D.I.Khan vide

order dated 04.5.2018, and as per his opinion his case not

Hasnain/* (S.B) Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad, J

-2-
covered under 3™ proviso of sub-section (1) of section
497 Cr.P.C.

2. The allegations as set forth in the crime
report are that on 25.12.2014 at 11.45 hours, complainant
Zeeshan Aziz alongwith dead body of deceased Kamran
Aziz aged about 17/18 years reported the matter to the
local police at Emergency Room Civil Hospital Daraban
that he alongwith his deceased brother had gone to their
landed property for its inspection. At 11.00 hours
accused/petitioner Hizbullah, who was armed with 12
bore shotgun, accused Fazal armed with 30 bore pistol,
accused Khalid Jan armed with 30 bore pistol, accused
Ahmad Jan armed with pistol, accused Attaullah son of
Ibrahim armed with axe, an unknown accused, who is son
of Attaullah and student of 9th class and their tenants
Attique son of Afzal , Majeed son of Saeed, Makhan son
of Ramzan residents of Daraban who were armed with
axe and clubs came to the spot. Accused/petitioner
Hizbullah opened fired at them with which he and his
brother received injuries whereas his brother succumbed

to injuries and expired on the spot. The other accused also

Hasnain* (S.B) Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad, J

-3-
attacked at him with their respective weapons due to
which he received injuries on his head and on his
eyebrow. Motive behind the occurrence is dispute over
landed property. The occurrence is reported to have
witnessed by complainant and his father namely Abdul
Aziz. After the occurrence the accused fled away from the
spot. Complainant charged the accused for attempting at
his life, causing injures to him and for the murder of his
brother namely Kamran Aziz, hence, the instant FIR.

3. The petitioner arrested on 12.4.2015, and
after arrest, he was put to trial, and was finally convicted
under Section 302 (B) Cr.P.C and sentenced to life
imprisonment with a fine of Rs.2,00,000/- to be paid to
the legal heirs of deceased, and in default of payment, six
months S.I, whereagainst, he filed appeal No.41-D/2017,
before this Court challenging therein the vires of the
impugned judgment, whereby, he was convicted and
sentences as stated above, and this Court after hearing the
case, set aside the conviction and sentence recorded by
the learned trial Court vide judgment dated 03.4.2018 and

remanded back the case for decision afresh after

Hasnain* (S.B) Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad, J
-4-
examination of essential witnesses as Court witnesses of
the cross FIR No. 232 by treating the petitioner as under
trial prisoner. The relevant portion of the judgment dated

03.4.2018 is reproduced as under:-

Thus, in order to meet the ends of justice
and moreso, for doing a substantial
justice, we, without commenting upon
the merits of the case, deem it appropriate
to set aside the impugned judgment and
remand back the case to the learned trial
court for decision afresh after
examination of essential witnesses as
court witnesses of the cross FIR No.232.
The appeal bearing No.43-D/2017, is
admitted and allowed, and the accused-
respondents No.1 to 8 are directed to
appear before the trial Court as accused
on bail subject to furnishing bail bonds in
the sum of Rs.80,000/- each with tow
sureties each, in the like amount to the
satisfaction of the learned trial court. The
accused Hizbullah shall be treated as
under trial prisoners and he shall be at
liberty to file an application for grant of
bail under proviso 3rd to subsection (1) of
Section 497 Cr.PC. Needless to mention
that criminal revision bearing Cr. Rev.

NO.11-D/2017, for enhancement of

Hasnain* (S.B) Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad, J

-5-
sentence is dismissed on having become
infructuous. The trial court is directed to
complete the entire process positively
within a period of one month after
receipt of the record which shall be sent
back forthwith to the learned trial court.

Whereafter, petitioner moved an application
under 3rd proviso of sub-section (i) of Section 497 Cr.P.C
for release on bail which was declined, vide order dated
04.5.2017, hence, this petition.

4. It was mainly argued by the learned counsel
for the petitioner that the accused was arrested on
12.4.2015, and since then, he is in continuous detention
and the delay in conclusion of trial cannot be attributed to
the accused, as such, the petitioner is entitled to the
concession of bail.

5. As against that, learned counsel for the
complainant vehemently opposed the prayer of the
petitioner and argued that delay in conclusion of trial is
not on the part of prosecution; that on full dressed trial,
the petitioner was convicted, vide judgment dated

29.5.2017, by the learned Additional Session Judge-III,

Hasnain* (S.B) Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad, J
-6-
D.I.Khan, however, on appeal, his conviction and
sentence was set aside and the case was remanded back to
the learned trial court for decision afresh after
examination of essential witnesses as court witnesses of
the cross FIR No. 232. He further contended that only one
witness of the cross FIR is to be examined, which exercise
can be done within one month and prayed for dismissal of
the petition.
6. I have given anxious consideration to the
arguments of the learned counsel for the parties and
scanned the record with their able assistance.
7. Perusal of the record reveal that the accused
was arrested on 12.4.2015, and after completion of usual
investigation, complete challan was submitted against the
petitioner and co-accused, and put to trial on 23.12.2015,
charge was framed on 15.12.2016. On 14.3.2016, PWs
could not be examined due to pre-occupation of the
learned counsel for the parties before the High Court. On
28.3.2016, PWs were absent and on 23.5.2016, PWs
could not be examined due to non-availability of the

learned counsel for petitioner. On 25.5.2016, PWs were

Hasnain* (S.B) Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad, J

-7-
not in attendance and on 25.4.2016; PWs could not be
examined due to non-availability of the learned counsel
for the petitioner. On 09.5.2016, PWs could not be
examined due to strike observed by the lawyers’
community. On14.5.2016, PWs were absent and on
20.6.2016, both the learned counsel for the parties were
busy before the High Court. On 11.7.2016, the lawyers’
community observed strike, therefore, PWs could not be
examined. On 18.7.2016, PWs could not be examined due
to adjournment sought by the learned defence counsel and
on 22.8.2016, again lawyers’ community observed strike.
On 05.9.2016, the presiding officer was on leave and on
19.9.2016, due to note reader, proceedings could not be
initiated. On 01.10.2016, due to non-availability of the
counsel for the complainant the case was adjourned and
on 15.10.2016, the lawyers’ community observed strike.

8. Perusal of record reveals that the petitioner
seeks post arrest bail on statutory grounds which is
statutory right and cannot be denied under the
discretionary power of the court to grant bail. However,

bail under the 3" proviso to Section 497 Cr.P.C could be

Hasnain* (S.B) Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad, J
-8-

refused to an accused only on the ground that the delay in
the conclusion of trial had been occasioned on account of
any act or omission of the accused or any other person
acting on his behalf. Bail under 3“ proviso to Section 497
(1) Cr.P.C could also be refused to an accused by the
Court, if case of the accused fell under the 4” proviso to
Section 497(1) Cr.P.C, but in all other cases, the Court
must grant bail.
9. It is now settled that an early trial is an
inherent right of every accused, and inordinate delay in
imparting justice was likely to cause erosion of public
confidence on one hand, and on the other, it was bound to
create sense of helplessness, despair and feelings of
frustration apart from adding to the woes of the public. In
this respect reliance can well be placed on the case
“Wazir Ali Vs. The State” (PLD 2005 K 201), wherein it
was held as under:-

“I have given due consideration to the
arguments of the learned counsel for the
applicant and learned State counsel. I have
also gone through the material placed on
record and the case-law cited at the bar.

Indeed, a direction to the trial Court to

Hasnain* (S.B) Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad, J
Hasnain*

-9-

conclude the trial within specified time if
not complied with, cannot be deemed to be
fresh ground as held in the case of
Muhammad Nawaz v. The State 2003 MLD
79, nevertheless, the delay in conclusion of a
trial when it appears to be shocking and
scandalous or when it appears that
complainant and his witnesses have played a
part in delaying the conclusion of the trial
by remaining absent despite having been
served in order to see that accused should
remain incarcerated for as much time as
possible can be taken into consideration for
grant of bail. The complainant and the P.Ws
who are related inter se and two of the
witnesses are real brothers of the
complainant, have failed to appear despite
issuance and service of P.Ws. against them,
this fact speaks for itself. Indeed, Provisos
(iii) and (iv) to section 497, Cr.P.C. stand
duly omitted during the pendency of this
case but even before introducing the said
provisos (iii) and (iv) to section 497(1),
Cr.P.C. bail was being granted in cases of
delay in conclusion of the trial which
appeared to be scandalous and shocking.
Hardship is also being considered as ground
for bail in appropriate cases by the superior

Courts of the country.”

(S.B) Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad, J

-10-

Reliance is also placed on the case of “Sher

Ali_alias Sheri Vs. The State” (1998 SCMR 190),

wherein it was held that:-

“---§, 497(1), third & fourth provisos---Bail

on the ground of statutory delay---Right of

accused for bail under the third proviso to S.

497(1), Cr.P.C. cannot be defeated on any

other ground except the delay mentioned in

the relevant clause and the grounds

provided in the fourth proviso thereof.”
10. I am also fortified by unreported judgment
of the apex Court in Criminal Petition No.1232 of 2016
titled, “Adnan Prince Vs. The State through P.G.,
Punjab and another” decided on 01.02.2017, wherein it
was held that if a case on statutory delay in the conclusion
of trial is made out then, ordinarily bail should not be
refused on hyper technical ground. It was also held that
“The Primary object behind this view is that in case any
accused person under detention is acquitted at the end of
the trial then, in no manner the wrong, caused to him due
to long incarceration in prison pending trial, he cannot be
compensated in any manner while on the other hand, in
case, if he is convicted then, he has to be rearrested and
put behind the bars to undergo his sentence and in that
case no prejudice would be caused to the

prosecution/complainant.”

Hasnain* (S.B) Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad, J

-ll-

Reference in this behalf may be made from
the judgment of this Court reported as “Shahzad Khan
Vs. The State” (2018 P Cr.LJ 104), wherein it was
observed as under:-

“S.497---Bail statutory delay---Scope---Bail
could not be refused on hyper technical
grounds if case on statutory delay in

conclusion of trial was made out.”

In this respect reference may also be made

from the judgment reported as “Behram VS. The State”

(2003 P Cr.LJ 73), wherein it was held that “fair and
expeditious trial is fundamental right of the accused
person which cannot be denied to him.”

11. In my view it is a fit case for grant of bail, as
the accused is to face the agonies of protracted trial, once
again, after remand of his case, he cannot be kept in jail
for indefinite period, therefore, I hold that the whole
period spent in Jail is countable while deciding the bail
petition on statutory delay. It is immaterial whether those
period spent as convict or under trial prisoner.

12. For what has been discussed above, I am of
the view that since the petitioner is in continuous
detention and has spent more than three years in Jail,
therefore, he is entitled to the grant of bail as a matter of
right and not a matter of grace, accordingly, the Cr.MBA.

No.129-D/2018 is accepted and the accused is directed to

Hasnain* (S.B) Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad, J
ae

-12-

be released on bail subject to furnishing bail bonds in the
sum of Rs.3,00,000/- (Rupees three lac) each, with two
sureties each, in the like amount to the satisfaction of
Illaqa/Duty Judicial Magistrate.

13. Above are the reasons of my short order of

even date.

Hasnain* (S.B) Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad, J

