Co

. JUDGMENT SHEET
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, D.LKHAN BENCH
(Judicial Department)
Sz A: No. 2 of Zoe.
JUDGMENT

Date of hearing has —o8 —ao A (P~

Appellant-peti##@rer (Midare rede MAG Ni

Li; Ml jes DSL a TAZ [cA ecade .

wicks le: fies ted eh

SHAKEEL AHMAD, J.- Through the instant criminal
appeal No. 55-D of 2016 the appellant has assailed the
judgment dated 01.6.2016 passed by the learned
Additional Sessions Judge- I D.I-Khan, whereby he was
convicted and sentenced under section 320 PPC to suffer
rigorous imprisonment for three (03) years, besides he is
also to pay Diyat to the legal heirs of the deceased
amounting to Rs. 16,80270/- and in default thereof he
shall remain in the prison till the final realization of the
Diyat amount. He was also convicted and sentenced under
section 427 PPC to pay Rs. 2400/- to the legal heirs of the
deceased on account of damage caused to the motorcycle
failing which he is to suffer for three (03) months S.I. The
sentences were ordered to be run concurrently.

2. Brief but relevant facts of the case are that on

23.4.2012 at about 1600 hours, the complainant alongwith

-2-

his injured son Ehsanullah, reported the matter to the local
police in emergency room of Civil Hospital D.I.Khan that
he was present in his house, on receipt of information
regarding the accident of his son, he rushed to the hospital
and found his son in injured and unconscious condition.
He came to know that his son was coming on motorcycle
from village Marra to his home and about 02:30 pm when
he reached Dera-Multan road near Marra, he was hit by
the unknown driver of motorcar No. 3228/DGL, due to
rash and negligent driving, resultantly his son got injured
and become unconscious, besides his motorcycle was also
got damaged, his report was incorporated into F.LR. Later
on, the injured was shifted to Nishtar Hospital, Multan
where he embraced death on 25.4.2012. Thereafter, the
accused was charged in the supplementary statement of
the complainant on 25.4.2012 and accordingly he was
implicated as an accused in case FIR No. 128 dated
23.4.2012 U/S 320/427/279 PPC of P.S Parova.

3. After completion and investigation, challan was
submitted against the accused, he was formally charged to
which he pleaded not guilty and claimed trial.

4. In order to prove its case the prosecution
examined as many as eleven (11) witnesses whereafter,
prosecution closed its evidence and statement of accused

facing trial was recorded U/S 342 Cr.P.C wherein he

Q»}
-3-

professed innocence, however, he neither wished to be
examined on oath nor produced defence witnesses.

5. At the conclusion of trial accused was
convicted and sentenced under section 320 P.P.C to suffer
rigorous imprisonment for three (03) years, besides, he
was held liable to pay Diyat to the legal heirs of the
deceased amounting to Rs. 1680270/- and in default of
payment of Diyat amount he shall remain in prison till the
final realization of Diyat amount. Section 279 P.P.C stand
merged in section 320 P.P.C. The accused was further
convicted and sentenced under section 427 P.P.C to pay
Rs. 2400/- to the legal heirs of the deceased on account of
causing damage to the motorcycle failing which, he is to
suffer three (03) months S.I. The sentences were held to
be run concurrently vide the judgment dated 01.6.2016
passed by the learned Additional Sessions Judge-I
D.I.Khan, hence this appeal.

6. The learned counsel for the appellant argued
that it is an un-witnessed crime. He further contended that
neither the complainant nor the PW-9 Ashiq Hussain is an
eye-witnesses of the alleged occurrence. The sole eye-
witness Muhamad Sadiq shown in the site plan was
neither examined nor produced as a witness and prayed

for acquittal of the accused.
-4-

7. As, against that the learned counsel appearing
on behalf of complainant argued that no doubt that the
complainant is not an eye-witness but PW-9 Ashiq
Hussain though not named as an eye-witness of the
occurrence in the FIR, has given the full details of the
occurrence implicating the accused in the instant case. The
learned AAG appeared on behalf of state and supported
the contentions of the counsel for the complainant.

8. Arguments heard and record perused.

9. Perusal of record reveals that, in the initial
report recorded through the Murasila Ex.PA/1, no eye-
witness has been cited by the complainant, besides,
admittedly, the eye witness Sadiq was shown at point No.
3 in the site plan in Ex. PB, was not examined. PW-9
Ashiq Hussain poses himself to be the eye-witness of the
alleged occurrence was not examined even under section
161 CrP.C by the LO. PW-6 Zameer Hussain S.I
(investigation) admitted in his cross examination that
though many people were present on the spot at the time
of occurrence, but admitted that except Sadiq no one has
seen the alleged occurrence and he also admitted that
people were present at the place of occurrence and he did
not record the statement of any of them.

11. Coming to the statement of the sole eye-witness

PW-9 Ashiq Hussain, a bare perusal of his cross
Sow]

-5-

examination reveals that he admitted that he has not been
cited as an eye-witness in the site plan. Though, stated in
his examination in chief that the injured was taken to the
DHQ hospital and informed his father about the sorrowful
incident and that he is co-villager of the complainant, but
astonishingly, he was neither named as an eye-witness in
the initial report Ex. PA/1 nor cited as a witness in the site
plan rather the site plan Ex. PB was prepared at the
instance abandoned witness Sadiq. He further admitted
that the matter was not reported to the local police by him.
Perusal of his statement further reveals that he has even
not alleged that the accused was driving motorcar in
question negligently and rashly.

12. In order to constitute offences under sections
279 and 320 P.P.C. It is necessary for the prosecution to
prove that besides over speed driving accused was also
guilty of driving rashly and negligently. In case of
collusion between two vehicles, the Court had to
determine many factors. Where the high speeding could
not be made a ground for presumption that driver was
responsible for the accident, unless it is established in a
reasonable manner that besides, the over speeding driving

of the vehicle found rash and negligent while driving.
-6-

13. In this respect, reliance can well be made in
case Farman Ullah Vs The State (2007PLD page 393
Peshawar).

14, Nowhere it was alleged by PW-9 Ashig that the
vehicle was being driven by the accused rashly and
negligently besides, PW-9 was examined in the Court for
the first time on 27.10.2015 and the alleged occurrence
had taken place on 23.4.2012. It seems that the said
witness was introduced at a belated stage, and that he had
not seen the alleged occurrence with his own eyes, and
was not present on the spot. He should have been
examined by the I.O. Even the complainant did not quote
him as an eye-witness of the alleged occurrence in his
initial report, particularly, when he is the co-villager of the
complainant and was present in the hospital. Even the
prosecution has failed to conduct identification parade of
the accused through PW-9 to connect him with the alleged
crime.

13. It is well settled principle of criminal
jurisprudence that no one shall be construed into the crime
in the absence of legal admissible evidence. There is no
scope and space for surmises and conjectures even with
high presumptions. Reliance in this respect may be placed

on the view taken by the apex Court in the case Miyan

Muhammad Latif Vs The State (PLD 966 in the

SB
of

(/

Bb

-7-

Supreme Court, page 2001). The view taken by the

learned Trial Judge while passing conviction order is
based on presumptory evidence, which is illegal.

14, For the above aforementioned reasons,it is held
that the prosecution has miserably failed to prove its case
against the accused beyond a reasonable doubt, therefore,
this appeal is allowed and the appellant is acquitted of all
the charges leveled against him. He is on bail and is

discharged from the liability of the bail bonds.

Announced.

Dt: 1Z. 08.2017. Aan
JUDGE

Minhas/*

