Judgment Sheet

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
ABBOTTABAD BENCH.

JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT

Cr.Appeal.No.122-A/2013.

JUDGMENT
Date of Hearing 20.02.2018
Appellants (Jameel& M/S Naseem Khan Swati
&Fazal e HagAbbasi,
another) by Advocates.
Respondent (State) by Raja Muhammad Zubair
AAG.
Complainant by Mr. Ghulam Mustafa Khan

Swati, Advocate.

SYED ARSHAD ALT, J:-Appellants-convictsJameel
and Aurangzeb sons of Jalal-ud-Din have filed instant
appeal against the conviction and sentence passed
against them by the learned Additional Sessions
Judge, Balakot Camp Mansehra,vide judgment dated
12.07.2013 in case FIR No. 384 dated 22.06.2010
under Section 302/148/149 PPC of Police Station
Shinkiari, District Mansehra, whereby the appellants-
convictswere convicted under Section 302-B PPC

and sentenced to life imprisonment on three counts
and to pay compensation amounting to Rs. 500,000/-
under Section 544-A Cr.P.C. to the legal heirs of all
the three deceased, in default whereof they have to
further undergo SI for six months. Benefit of Section
382-B Cr.P.Chas been extended to them.

2. Khan Asghar ASI PW-11, when
informed about the present incident, reached at the
spot at about 10:30 AM on 22.06.2010, where he
received information from Muhammad Riaz S/o
GoharRehman complainant to the effect that while he
was present at his house, his father GoharRehman,
brother Haq Nawaz and mother Mehr-un-Nisa had
gone to Racharri for reaping grass. He was informed
by Shoukat son of Abdul Qayyum that Aurangzeb
and others have killed his parents and brother. On
such information, he rushed to the spot along with
other people, where he found that his father
GoharRehman, mother Mehr-un-Nisa and_ brother
Haq Nawaz were lying dead. There, his uncle
Muhammad Afzal (PW-14) was also present who
disclosed that at about 09:30 AM, accused
Aurangzeb, Jameel, Abdur Rasheed, Fazal-ur-

Rehman, Abdul Qayyum sons of Jalal-ud-Din and
Jalal-ud-Din son of Painda came at the spot and
started quarreling with his parents. During that
quarrel, Jalal-ud-Din and Abdul Qayyum caught hold
of his brother and Aurangzeb accused inflicted axe
blow on his head and killed him. Similarly, Abdur
Rasheed and Jameel inflicted knife blows at the
abdomen of his father GoharRehman who succumbed
to the injuries. Jalal-ud-Din and Abdul Qayyum
caught hold of his mother Mehr-un-Nisa and Jameel
stabbed her with the knife due to which she also
succumbed to the injuries. It was also reported that
the occurrence was witnessed by Muhammad Afzal
and Fazal-ur-Rehman. The said report was
incorporated in the shape of Murasila Ex PW-11/1 on
the basis of which FIR Ex PA was registered.

3. Accordingly, Khan AsgharASI prepared
injury sheet of deceased Haq Nawaz (Ex PW-11/2),
injury sheet of deceased GoharRehman(Ex PW-1/3)
and injury sheet of Mst. Mehr-un-NisaEx(PW-1 1/4).
He also prepared their inquest reports as Ex PW-11/5
to Ex PW-11/7 and handed over the dead bodies to
Muhammad Javed(PW-3) for postmortem

examination.Murasila was also sent through the same
constable Muhammad Javed for the registration of

the case.
4.

examined

Dead bodies of male deceased were

by Dr. Tariq Khan,

Officer,RHCShinkiari(PW-1). According

Medical

to his

report Ex PW-1/1, he found the following injuries on

the body of deceased GoharRehman:-

“1. At the right subcostal
region in scapular line 3” x 5”
long and deep to bone lower
ribs fragmented.

2. At mid axillary line 5”
long gaped with underline bone
fragmented. Liver damaged.

3. Left occipital — region,
bone seen but not fractured.”

While according to Postmortem report

of deceased Haq Nawaz (Ex PW-1/3), he found

following injuries:-

1.

“First stab wound in mid
scapula region 1” and sharp
and deep into the thorax.
Stab wound in the back in the
scapular line 1” long sharp
and deep into the thorax.

. 5” x 6” lacerated and gaped

wound in the right subcostal
region with under line bones,
liver are damaged.”
The dead body of deceased Mst. Mehr-un-Nisa was
examined by Dr. Nargis Khan (PW-12) who found
the following injuries on her body:-

“1. Stab wound on left breast

upper inner quadrant I cm deep

and 3 cm in length.

2. Stab wound 6/7 cm in

length 2 cm in breath (width) 1

to 1 % cm in depth in left flank

region four fingers above the

anterior superior iliacspined.

3. Superficial peeled off skin

about 3 cm on the back left

scapular region.”
5. The investigation of the case was
entrusted to Fazal-ur-Rehman SI (PW-15) on the
same day. Accordingly, he visited the spot along with
Muhammad Farid IHC and constable Hamayun who
were accompanied by Afzal Shah and Fazal-ur-
Rehman. On pointation of eyewitnesses, he prepared
site plan (Ex PW-15/1) and recovered blood stained
earth from the places where the deceased were lying
dead. The blood stained earth recovered from the
places of each deceased was sealed in parcels Ex P-1,
P-2 and P-3. He also recorded statements of the

marginal witnesses of the recovery memos and also

recovered blood stained garments of deceased
GoharRehman, Mehr-un-Nisa and Haq Nawaz which
were sealed in parcels Ex P-6 to Ex P-8. The said
parcels were sent to Serologist for examination and
report. On 24.06.2010, accused Aurangzeb, Jameel,
Abdur Rasheed and Jalal-ud-Din were arrested by the
SHO from Toll Gali,Dadar, who were then formally
arrested by the investigating officer and he issued
their card of arrest Ex PW-15/2. Initially proceedings
under Section 204 Cr.P.C. were initiated against
accused Abdul Qayyum and Fazal-ur-Rehman, who
were avoiding their arrested. During the
investigation, weapon of offence i.e. knife (Churri)
Ex P-lwas recovered at the pointation of Jameel
accused from his house which was kept on a cot
under folded quilt which was sealed into parcel No. 7
through recovery memo Ex PW-7/1. Similarly, on the
pointation of Aurangzeb accused, from his house, a
small size axe Ex P-9 was recovered vide recovery
memo. Whereas Abdur Rasheed accused lead the
investigating officer to his house where from inside a
nook, a large knife (Churri) blood stained was
recovered. All the accused were produced before the

Judicial Magistrate for their custody. During
investigation, accused Jameel and Aurangzeb
confessed their guilt before the Judicial Magistrate on
28.06.210 Ex PW-6/2 and Ex PW-6/5 respectively.
Accused Abdul Qayyum was arrested on 30.06.2010
when his pre-arrest bail was dismissed while accused
FazalurRehman was arrested on 20.06.2010 on
dismissal of his BBA. The weapons of offence were
also sent to the Serologist for examination and report.
According to the report of serologist Ex PW-15/14,
all the articles contained human blood. After
completion of investigation, he submitted complete
challan for trial of the accused.

6. After supplying copies to the accused in
compliance of Section 265-C Cr.P.C. the learned trial
Court framed charge against the accused to which
they pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. The
prosecution was thus asked to produce its evidence.
In order to prove its case against the accused,
prosecution produced and examined 15 PWs and
closed its evidence. The learned trial Court recorded
statements of the accused under Section 342 Cr.P.C.
After hearing arguments of learned counsel for the

parties, the learned trial Court convicted the
appellants-convicts under Section 302-B PPC and
sentenced them to undergo life imprisonment on
three counts. They were further ordered to pay
compensation of Rs. 500,000/- to the legal heirs of
each deceased under Section 544-A Cr.P.C. and in
default to further undergo SI for six months. Benefit
of Section 382-B Cr.P.C. was extended to them.
However, co-accused Jalal-ud-Din, Abdul Rasheed,
Abdul Qayyum and Fazal-ur-Rehman were acquitted
of the charge.

7. Arguments heard and record perused.

8. The prosecution case from the very
inception rests on the oral testimony of complainant,
statement of PW Shoukat S/o Abdul Qayum who
informed the complainant about the occurrence and
the eyewitnesses Muhammad Afzal and Fazal-ur-
Rehman who have allegedly seen the occurrence; the
confession of appellants-convicts Jameel and
Aurangzeb and recovery of crime weapons as well as
other incriminating materials.

9. We will first consider the oral evidence
of the prosecution. Complainant in his report has

stated that at the time of occurrence, he was present
at his home and the deceased had gone for reaping
grass to the place of occurrence which is at a distance
coverable within 15/20 minutes from his house. He
was informed by Shoukat S/o Abdul Qayyum
regarding the occurrence. As such, the complainant is
not an eyewitness of the occurrence whereas Shoukat
and Fazal-ur-Rehman were abandoned by the
prosecution. Therefore, the prosecution was only left
with the testimony of PW-14 Muhammad Afzal.
While appearing as PW-14, he narrated the same
story, aS mentioned in the FIR. During his cross
examination, he deposed that he was at a distance
25/30 yards from the place of occurrence, however,
he reached the spot within 4/5 minutes. He also
happens to be the brother of deceased GoharRehman
and despite being at a close proximity to the site of
occurrence, neither he nor the other witness made any
effort to rescue the deceased, even though they had
noticed that the accused while armed with knives and
axe were quarreling with them. Thus, his presence at
the crime spot due to his unnatural conduct has
become highly doubtful. In a similar situation, the

Honourable Supreme Court of Pakistan in case of
“PathanVersus The State (2015 SCMR 315)”,
while interpreting Article 129 of the Qanun-e-
Shahadat Order, has held as follows:-

“Keeping in view the
provision of Article 129 of

the Qanun-e-Shahadat
Order, which is to the
following effect: --

"S.129. Court may

presume existence of
certain facts.---The Court
may presume the
existence of any fact
which it thinks likely to
have happened regard
being had to the common
course of natural events,
human conduct — and
public and __ private
business, in their relation
to the facts of the
particular case-"

The presence of witnesses on
the crime spot due to their
unnatural conduct has
become highly doubtful,
therefore, no explicit
reliance can be placed on
their testimony. They had
only given photogenic /
photographic narration of
the occurrence but did
nothing nor took a_ single
step to rescue the deceased.
The causing of that much of
stab wounds on the deceased
loudly speaks that if these
three witnesses were present
on the spot, being close
blood relatives including the
son, they would have
definitely intervened,
preventing the accused from
causing further damage to
the deceased rather strong
presumption operates that
the deceased was done to
death in a merciless manner
by the culprit when he was at
the mercy of the latter and
no one was there for his
rescue. In similar
circumstances, the evidence
of such eye-witnesses was
disbelieved by this Court in
the case of Masood Ahmed
and Muhammad Ashraf. v.
The State (1994 SCMR 6).

It was vehemently argued by
the learned Advocate
Supreme Court for the
appellant that on the day of
occurrence it was Sunday
and being a_ Gazetted
holiday, the appellant was
not at all required to attend
to his official duty at the
school to which he was
attached and for that reason
the giving company to him by
his son and by sheer chance
the joining of the other two
P.Ws. with them renders the
testimony of the P.Ws.
absolutely doubtful.”

Probably it was due to the unnatural conduct of the

prosecution

witnesses which compelled

the

prosecution to abandon PWFazal-ur-Rehman and
Shoukat informer. Therefore, in the circumstances
stated above the abandoning of the above witness
will obviously lead to adverse inference in terms of
Article 129-G of the Qanun-e-Shahadate Order,
1984. It is settled law that if any party withholds the
best piece of evidence, then it can fairly be presumed
that such party has some sinister motive behind it.
Besides, it will create impression that, had such
witness been produced into witness box, he might
have not supported the prosecution case. “Lal Khan
Vs The State (2006 SCMR 1846), Muhammad Rafiq
and others Vs the State (2010 SCMR_ 385)”.
Therefore, the learned trial Court has_ rightly
disbelieved his testimony and the co-accused were
acquitted against which the prosecution has not filed
any appeal against acquittal.

10. Now moving on to the confessional
statement of the accused and its evidentiary value.
The only piece of evidence which prevailed before
the learned trial Court to convict the appellants was
their confessional statement before Judicial
Magistrate and the recovery of crime weapons. It is

settled law that confession must not only be
voluntary but it must also be true. In order to
ascertain the truthfulness of confession, it must be
visualized and examined in juxtaposition with the
other evidence of the prosecution. For such
comparison we would like to reproduce the
confessional statement of both the accused:-

164/364 r283 92) GIL os 3s CSL Gua De ay dase Gla
oo Ula 2S Uy Gals SB jg) Gls ps ne dy SUS ly
ZS vals 23 OSs) ap Led US Nye! 98 clad US dla Oy Gs
gS Cale Alles Ila S D'S 8 pa gil 2S Uslly GK
os) gp Ge p23 Sil iS pei pip pie Gus Woy 8
Use ne 89 59 9S 93 “Bu OS ga AS ei ip Uda
8 SB valt ue Cope 8 Soe hs) ste: |e 53!
SB Se 2 Ge 23 uslls 68 55! als Sl & LS
calls Gleay 8 aly 2S vald 23 Oly usin ap Atle!
sa ok ES Sls S uspee 8 5h Gs ctl 55! clulll jp

“ot SB SO} AUS —il dlls Se ot!

164/364 282 925 GUL 6 5p Sks Gp De aly Cy By 5! oly
Gus

ow SB chay 2 S& Jsihe do 55) She ps ne ALS Oly
ey ul shod S Use LA LS 21S 1S Op Cole Vals
ZS Vali oy Sd 3 a SG ys hs 698 2 Urs BOLE Ail
23 Ba 9S vlad gas lo S 8 Say sll cial
S se S pd pip Ulser os) pg pin pb Ge Ul
ZS Us site Sree ile Ie os) Use ne hs 592 9S 3 Be
ce A Gls Ful Be 26 Gu Spe S Soe 8
ols Gleay 2S alls -S Gals 3 Olay: U sis az ill US
sha oe ES OS ly S usee 8S Sls b= cle 55) eluill ys
use oe os) SS N32! Gp Cole 23 vals 55) Gal sie Oy
ala lS Se tl ial ep Se 2 Se5-eb
dase ole -S usin a -o LS dé So) GbE US 2
wl 3 Olt oe Gee te Urs te AS 5! 2 Shs
-ad S

12. Both the confessional statements, as

evident from the certificates appended to the same,
were recorded at the same time and day. Contents of
the confession of Aurangzeb are verbatim copy of the
confession of Jameel except the last three lines,
which is an addition in the confessional statement of
Aurangzeb. In their confessional statement, the
confessors have not given time of occurrence,
whereas the venue of occurrence discerns from the
said confessions is the house of the complainant.
Against that the prosecution case is that the
occurrence has taken place at “Racharri” which is
situated at a considerable distance from the house of
the complainant and the deceased had gone there for
cutting grass and the blood stained earth was also
recovered from the aforesaid place of occurrence.
Therefore, the venue of occurrence has been narrated
differently from the prosecution.

The case can be looked from another
angle because as per prosecution case, the deceased
at the relevant time had gone for cutting grass and it
will be very unnatural that they would cut grass
without any tools i.e. sickle etc. Therefore, it also
appears very unnatural and improbable that the two

accused were able to caught hold of the three
deceased, out of whom one Haq Nawaz was a young
man, and in the said scuffle, the accused did not
receive a single injury. As appellants were arrested
on 24-06-2010 and there is no medical examination
which suggest that either of them had any injury on
their body. Therefore, the confessional story of the
accused does not appear to be true. Indeed it
completely belies the prosecution story. Regarding
the voluntariness of the said confession, suffice it to
mention that the same was recorded after four days of
their arrest. In “Muhammad Parvez and others Vs
The State (2007 SCMR 630)”, the apex Court has
held that confessional statement recorded with a
delay of four days, could not be made basis for
conviction of the accused.

13. There is no cavil to the proposition that
conviction can be awarded to the accused on the basis
of their sole confession, however, for that the
confession must be voluntary, true, without any
inducement, fear and coercion. In “Manjeet Singh
Vs. The State (PLD 2006 SC 30)”, the august

Supreme Court held that:-
“There is no rule of criminal
administration of justice that
the Court having found the
retracted confession voluntary
and true, must also look for
the corroboration and in
absence of corroborative
evidence conviction cannot be
maintained. The retraction of
a judicial or extra-judicial
confession itself is not an
infirmity to be considered
sufficient to withhold the
conviction because the
evidentiary value of a
confession is not diminished
by mere fact that it was
retracted by the maker at the
trial and thus the independent
corroboration from — other
source direct or
circumstantial, cannot be
insisted in every case as a
mandatory rule rather the rule
of corroboration is applied as
abundant caution and in a
case depending entirely on the
confessional statement of a
person or only of the
circumstantial evidence, this
rule is applied — more
cautiously.”

14. In the circumstance and the manner and
mode, the confessions of the appellants-convicts were
recorded which were subsequently retracted, as a rule
of caution, it must be supported by some

connecting/corroborative evidence. “State Vs Wagar

(1992 SCMR 950), Nazir Hussain Vs The Crown
(1969 SCMR 442) , Habib Ullah Vs The State (1971
SCMR 341) and Staet Vs. Minhun (PLD 1964 SC
813)”.

15. The prosecution claims corroboration
from recovery of crime weapons i.e. Churriand axe.
As alleged by the prosecution, both the crime
weapons allegedly recovered contained human blood
as per Serologist report, however, despite the fact that
the blood stained garments and sand were also sent
for examination, the prosecution has not bothered to
simultaneously send the same for matching or
grouping of the blood on the crime weapons with the
blood on the clothes of the deceased. Therefore, this
missing chain would obviously benefit the accused.
16. In the circumstances when the alleged
confessional statement of the appellants-convicts not
only belies the mode and manner of the occurrence as
narrated by the prosecution, and the said confession
is not corroborated by any other material evidence,
then we are afraid that such confessional statement
have been wrongly considered for passing conviction
against the accused. Additionally, the motive behind

the occurrence was that the brother of complainant
had contracted court-marriage with the sister of
appellants-convicts, however, it is also a settled law
that the motive is double edged weapon which cuts
both sides.

17. In view of the above, we hold that the
prosecution has failed to prove its charge against the
appellants-convicts as well, beyond any shadow of
doubt, therefore, while accepting this appeal, we set
aside the impugned conviction and sentence passed
against the appellants/convicts and acquit them from
the charge leveled against them. They be set free
forthwith, if not required in any other case/crime.

18. These are the reasons for our short order
of the even date.

Announced.

Dt. 20.02.2018
JUDGE

JUDGE
19

Tufail * Hon'ble JusticesLal Jan Khattak&Syed Arshad Ali
