JUDGMENT SHEET
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
ABBOTTABAD BENCH.

(Judicial Department)

Cr.A No. 14-A/2014 with
Murder Reference No.04-A/2014

Mukhtasir & 5 others.
Vs.
The State & Bin Yamin.

JUDGMENT

Date of hearing 28.03.2017

Appellant-Petitioner

Respondent

ISHTIAQ IBRAHIM, J.- This Criminal Appeal

No.14-A/2014, has been filed by  convicts/

appellants, Murder Reference No.04-A/2014 against

accused/ appellant Mukhtasar and the connected

Criminal Appeal No.25—A/2014 against acquitted

accused, and Criminal Revision No.07-A/2014 for

enhancement of sentence of appellants in Cr.A

No.14-A/2014 filed by Muhammad Afzal, legal heir

of deceased, arise from the judgment of learned
-2-

Sessions Judge, Kohistan, whereby he on

30.01.2014, while acquitting Maulana Javed,

Maulana Noor-ul-Haq, Moasam Khan, Jehangir,

Baseer and Munshi, convicted appellant No.1

Mukhtasir under section 302-b PPC, to death, while

convicted appellants No.2 to 6 under section 302 (b)

PPC and sentenced to life imprisonment with

compensation of Rs.200000/- (two lac) each for

murder of deceased Sher Wali and Rafi-ud-din or in

default thereof to further undergo six months S.I

each.

2. Since both appeals, murder reference

and criminal revision are the outcome of one and the

same occurrence/ F.I.R, therefore, these are being

disposed of by way of this single judgment.

3. Initially, complainant Binyamin reported

the matter to the local police on 04.01.2013 at 04.00

hours, to the effect that on 03.01.2013 at 13.00 hours

he alongwith Shah Faisal, Sher Wali and Rafi-ud-Din
-3-

were busy in ablution for “Zohar” prayer in a canal

near their house, in the meanwhile the accused

Mukhtasar, Awal Khan, Shams-ud-din, Jantazir,

Taus, Purdil and Munshi duly armed with firearms

emerged and started firing, resultantly, Shah Faisal

was hit with the fire shot of deceased Mukhtasar,

Sher Wali was hit with the fire shot of accused Awal

Khan, while Rafi-ud-Din was hit with the fire shot of

accused Jantazir, Taus and Purdil and all the three

injured died on the spot and the complainant was hit

with the fire shot of Munshi and sustained single

injury on heel of his left foot. After commission of

offence, the accused decamped from the spot. The

accused have committed the offence at the instance

and consultation of accused Maulana Javed, Maulana

Noorl-ul-Haq, Musam Khan, Jehangir and Bashir. It

was alleged that the occurrence was witnessed by the

complainant as well as Alam Sher and Gulab. Motive

for the offence, as alleged by the complainant, was

previous dispute over women folk.
-4-

4. Sheraz Ahmad SHO (PW-3) reduced the

report of the complainant, in shape of murasila

(Ex:PA) at the spot. It was read over and explained

to the complainant, who after admitting it to be

correct thumb impressed the same in token of its

correctness, whereafter, he prepared the injury sheets

and inquests reports of all the three deceased as well

as injury sheet of injured/ complainant and referred

them for Post mortem and medical treatment of the

complainant under the escort of Sher Ghazi IHC and

Constable Khan Muhammad 427. The murasila was

also sent to the Police Station concerned though

Constable Rahim Dad No.744, where on the basis of

which F.I.R as Ex: PA/1 was registered against the

accused under sections 302/324/109/1148/149 PPC.

5. Investigation started in the case and on

its completion, complete challan was submitted to

the Court of learned Sessions Judge, Kohistan.

Learned trial Court delivered the copies of relevant
-5-

documents to accused in compliance with provision

of section 265-C Cr.PC and charge was framed

against them, to which they did not plead guilty and

claimed trial. In order to prove the charge against the

accused, the prosecution produced and examined as

many as eleven (11) PWs. On conclusion of

prosecution evidence, statements of accused were

recorded, wherein all the accused professed their

innocence, however, neither they wished to be

examined on oath as provided under section 340(2)

Cr.PC nor opted to produce defence evidence. After

hearing arguments of learned counsel for the parties,

the learned trial court vide impugned judgment dated

30.01.2014 acquitted the accused Munshi, Maulana

Javid, Maulana Noor-ul-Haq, Mosam Khan, Jehangir

and Baseer, while convicted accused Mukhtasar

under section 302(b) PPC and sentenced to death,

whereas accused Awal Khan, Shams-ud-Din,

Jantazir, Taus and Yadool were convicted under

section 302(b) PPC and_ sentenced to life
-6-

imprisonment with compensation Rs.200000/-(two

lac) each to the legal heir of deceased, or in default

whereof to further undergo six moths SI. The

convicted accused/ appellants have filed this criminal

Appeal No.14-A/2014, while the complainant filed

Cr.A No.25-A/2014 against acquitted accused/

respondents and Cr. R_ No.07-A/2014 _ for

enhancement of sentence against convicted accused.

Appeals, murder reference and criminal revision are

going to be decided through this common judgment.

6. Learned counsel for accused/ appellants

argued that the report has been lodged at the spot

with a considerable delay without any explanation

after consultation and deliberation by maneuvering a

concocted story, that too after preliminary

investigation. He further argued that no specific

firearm in the hands of accused/appellants have been

mentioned and it was alleged by the complainant in

the F.I.R that all the appellants have started firing, so
-7-

identity of specific shot to specific deceased by

specific appellants is not possible. He supported his

argument by submitting that as per site plan the

accused were almost at a distance of 38/39 paces,

about 94 feet from the complainant party, therefore,

identification of specific short by a specific accused

to a specific deceased or injured is not possible. He

went on to say that prosecution evidence is

contradictory, pregnant with jumble of dents and

doubts, smeared with interestedness, hence, could

not be based for conviction. His next argument was

that previous enmity of complainant with other

people was admitted by PWs at trial, hence, it may

be the act of others to counter their enmity.

Developing his arguments he argued that the

occurrence is not taken place in the mode and

manner as setup by the prosecution. Lastly, learned

counsel for the appellants urged that the learned trial

Court by not adverting to the facts and circumstances
-8-

of the case, has felled into error and therefore, the

impugned judgment is liable to be reversed.

7. As against that, learned counsel for the

complainant, who was also assisted by learned AAG

argued that prosecution has fully established the guilt

of the appellants through cogent, coherent and

confidence inspiring evidence in the shape of

recovery of blood, crime empties from the spot of

occurrence and as well through medical evidence and

thus they have rightly been convicted by the learned

trial Court. He further argued that the learned trial

court by not relying on the same evidence erred in

law by acquitting the accused/ respondents of

connected criminal appeal. He lastly prayed that

acquitted accused/ respondents be also convicted

under the law and sentence of accused/ appellant

may be enhanced to meet the ends of justice.

8. Arguments heard and record perused.
-9-

9. Perusal of the record reveals that

admittedly, the report was made to the local police

with the delay of fifteen (15) hours, as the occurrence

took place on 03.01.2013 at 13.00 hours, while the

report was lodged on 04.01.2013 at 04.00 hours at

the spot, whereas distance between the place of

occurrence and police station has been shown to be

39/40 kilometers. So non-availability of traffic or any

other ground urged by the prosecution would be of

no use to them and delay in the circumstances of the

case reacts on the genuineness of the story set up by

the prosecution. Wisdom is derived from case titled

“State_through the Advocate _General_N.W.F.P

Peshawar Vs. Shah Jehan” (PLD2003 SC 70).

10. The report was not lodged by the

complainant in the police station, rather he reported

the occurrence to the police on their arrival at his

residence, where he was present alongwith the dead

bodies and had made no effort to shift the deadbodies
-10-

to the hospital or to the police station. It has been

held time and again that FIR which is not recorded at

Police Station, suffers from the inherent doubts.

Reliance may be placed on case titled “Allah

Bachaya and another Vs the State (PLD 2008 SC

349).

11. It is in the evidence that after the

occurrence, despite the fact that complainant also

received injury at the heel of his left foot, did not

consult the doctor for his treatment and remained

present at the spot for about 14 hours, till arrival of

police, which fact is not appealable to a prudent

mind, rather it gives an inference that the story was

tailored during the interregnum.

12. As per narration in the FIR (Ex:PA/1)

the specific role were given to all the seven

accused/appellants, who were shown to be present at

the time of occurrence, duly armed with

sophisticated weapons side by side to each other and
-ll-

made indiscriminate firing at the complainant and the

deceased, while according to site plan (ExPW9/1)

approximate distance between the accused and the

deceased was 39/40 paces, then how can the

complainant identify the shot of each accused and

specify for specific casualty which is quite unnatural

and unbelievable, rather against the human

perception and repellant to human conduct.

13. Besides, if we take the case of each

deceased qua the accused charged for their murder, it

is apparent from the post mortem reports that

deceased Faisal sustained injury which was attributed

to accused/ appellant Mukhtasar, while deceased

Sher Wali was hit with the firing of Awal Khan and

Shams-ud-Din appellant and likewise, Rafi-ud-din

got hit from the firing of appellants Jantazir, Taus

and Yadol. This is quite strange that in case of

deceased Faisal sustained solitary injury and for that

only Mukhtasar was charged, while deceased Sher
-12-

Wali received two firearm entry wounds for which

two appellants namely Awal Khan and Shams-ud-din

were charged and deceased Rafi-ud-din sustained

three firearm entry wounds and for that three

appellants Jantazir, Taus and Yadol, were charged.

This aspect of the case clearly depicts that the FIR

was purposely lodged after considerable delay and

preliminary investigation was conducted in this case

in order to make the charge commensurate with the

number of accused charged qua each deceased,

otherwise that narration of the complainant, noticing

the bullet oozing from muzzle of the weapon of each

accused and hitting specific deceased, is far from

human capacity and observation.

14. Both the witnesses are closely related to

all the deceased, as well as each other, therefore

these witnesses can legitimately be termed as

interested witness and statements of these witnesses

are to be looked into with great care and caution.
-13-

Undoubtedly the statement of interested witness

which even for that matter inimical witness can be

taken into consideration but the rule of appraisal is

that the same is supported by some _ strong

corroboration from some independent source. In

order to believe a witness first the prosecution has to

satisfy the Court regarding presence of the witnesses

at the spot and secondly whether they are credible

truthful witnesses and thereafter conviction can be

based on testimony of inimical witness, if same is

corroborated by some strong corroborative piece of

evidence. Reliance is placed on case titled “Haji

Rab Nawaz _Vs_Sikandar__Zulgarnain _and_7

others”(1998 SCMR 25), wherein it is held that:

“One salutary principle laid down by
this Court in this behalf land which is
now firmly established is, that in a
case involving capital punishment, the
courts will not base conviction of an
accused solely on the testimony of
interested witness, unless such
evidence finds corroboration by some

other independent and unimpeachable
-14-

nature of evidence or circumstance in

the case.”

15. Now it is to be seen whether the

narration by above noted PWs are truthful, correct,
reliable, coherent and supporting each other or not.
Complainant Binyamin (PW-7) has attributed
firearm injury sustained by him to accused/
respondent Munshi, but on the other hand the
medico-legal examination conducted by Doctor
Muhammad Geer, (PW-11), shows that:

“There is a skin deep lacerated wound

at the heel of left foot. The wound is

3x2 cm in diameter. There is no

bleeding. Nature of injuries Ghair-

Jaifah-Damiyah. Probable duration of
injury 25/26 hours.”

In cross-examination he affirms, that
the injury was caused to the injured by sharp edged
stone. He further admits that blunt injury can be
caused through stone. If this is the position of the
prime witness of the prosecution, how this court

could rely on the testimony of such witness and
-15-

award capital punishment to the accused charged in

the FIR, where his own narration is negated by the

medical evidence regarding injuries sustained by

him. Reliance is placed on case titled, “Bashir

Ahmad_alias Mannu_ Vs _ The State” (NLR 1996

criminal 234) _and “Muhammad _ Irshad and

another Vs the State 1999 SCMR 1030), wherein it

is held that:

“The eye-witness examined by the
prosecution are closely related to
one and other and the rule of
prudence required that there
Should have been some
independent corroboration
available for placing implicit
reliance on their testimony but the
same is lacking and it would be
highly unsafe to act upon the
uncorroborated testimony of eye-
witnesses examined by the
prosecution, particularly when it
is full of material contradictions.
It is in conflict with the medical
evidence, also with regard to the
distance from which the deceased
and the injured P.Ws_ were

reportedly fired at. The deceased
-16-

and the eye-witnesses were not
persons of good antecedents as
apparent from record, showing
them involved in several criminal

cases.

Even stamp of injury on the person of complainant

would not per see tantamount to a stamp of credence

on his testimony. Reliance is placed on case titled

“Muhammad Hayat and another Vs_the State”

996 SCMR 1411), wherein it is held that:

“There is no cavil with the
proposition laid down in the case
of “Zaab Din and another Vs the
State” (PLD 1986 Peshawar 188)
that merely because the PWs had
stamp of fire-arm injury on their
person was not per see
tantamount to a_ stamp of

credence on their testimony.

16. Another eye-witness who was examined

by the prosecution is Gulab son of Patang (PW-8),

deposes that he was present in his house, on the

report of fire shots he came out from the house and

noticed the appellants firing at the complainant party.
-17-

It is strange enough that investigation officer has

observed and have mentioned all the places in the

site plan, but house of this PW has not been cited in

it. Moreover, foot note of the site plan shows that it

was prepared at the instance of complainant, the eye-

witnesses Ahmad Sher (abandoned witness) and

Gulab (PW-8), but he (Gulab) squarely disown the

preparation of site-plan at his court statement.

Meaning thereby that the statement of Ghulab Khan

is contradictory to the site plan (ExPW9/1).

17. Both the parties are at daggers drawn

since long, when the tragedy of “Kohistan girl’s

video scandal” came into lime light. Houses of both

the parties are situated in the same area and they are

having such a touchy and sensitive motive between

them, then it is highly improbable that in this

particular tribal area they would not equipped

themselves with the firearms.
-18-

18. All the deceased were busy in making

ablution by removing trousers (Shalwar), in presence

of each other which is also against the tradition of

our society and it shows falsity of the story of the

prosecution. Moreover, the accused have been shown

in the site plan at upper level, while the deceased

were at the bank of canal and were on lower level to

the appellants, but it is strange enough that all the

injuries on the bodies of deceased are from

downward to upward. The site plan and medical

evidence are contradictory to each other.

19. On the other hand, 4 empties of 303

bore and 30 empties of 7.62 bore were recovered

from the spot, which were never sent to the FSL to

ascertain whether the same were fired from one or

different weapons, which would have fortified the

charge of participation of more than one accused and

would have rendered strong corroboration to the

ocular testimony furnished by complainant Binyamin
-19-

(PW-7) and Gulab (PW-8). More particularly, when

case of the prosecution was that seven accused made

indiscriminate firing at the complainant party

effectively. Ironically the empties were sent to the

FSL alongwith two weapons allegedly recovered

from the house of accused Awal Khan and Taus

Khan only to the effect whether the same were fired

from the weapons mentioned above are not, and in

this respect the report of FSL Ex: PW-9/40 and Ex:

PW 9/41 are in negative, which smacks of

concealment, as seven accused were allegedly

involved in the case.

20. From the above assessment of evidence

it is discernable that the charge made by the

complainant party is exaggerated, as seven members

of one family have been implicated on the strength of

the motive which is more tempting then blood feud.

Reliance is placed on case titled “Muhammad
-20-

Zaman Vs the State and others” (2014 SCMR 749),

wherein it is held that:

“The number of assailants in the
circumstances of the case appears
to have been exaggerated. It
seems that most of the persons
including the respondents have
been charged because of previous
enmity. The tragedy may have
been enacted by Mukhtar who has
gone into hiding or Munawar
who has been acquitted because
the deceased shabbier was alleged
to have illicit relation with their
sister, but many who have no
visible nexus with this part of the
story have also been roped in. It is
so because it is customary in this
part of the country to throw wide
net of implication to rope in all
those who could possibly pursue
the case or do something to save
the skin of the one who is
innocent or who is actually
responsible for the commission of
the crime. The court, therefore, is
required to exercise much greater
care and circumspection while

appraising evidence.
-21-

al. Learned counsel for the complainant

submitted that this case is offshoot of “Kohistan

girls video scandal’, which was nationally &

internationally publicized and the accused are also

not entitled to the leniency at all, as they have

brought bad name to the country. The courts are not

supposed to be swayed away by emotions or

sentimental submissions of the parties, while

deciding fate of criminal cases, rather they are

supposed to administer justice by strictly adhering to

the recognized principles of criminal justice.

Heinousness of offence would not be the yardstick

for adjudging guilt of the accused rather Court has to

see the evidence which has been adduced by the

prosecution, whether it is up to the mark and is of

unimpeachable character, which in this case, in our

view, is not forthcoming.

22. Motive no doubt that is “Kohistan girl’s

video scandal”, same is double edge weapon, which
-22-

cuts either way. Moreover, the corroborative piece of

evidence, which by itself is not sufficient to adjudge

the accused guilty. Admittedly, it is also matter of

record that two persons, who were involved in the

video scandal, they are still alive. Hence, motive is

not helpful to the case of prosecution.

23. It is settled law that for giving the

benefit of doubt it is not necessary that there should

be many circumstances creating doubts. Single

circumstance creating reasonable doubt in a prudent

mind about the guilt of accused makes him entitled

to its benefit, not as a matter of grace and concession

but as a matter of right. Reference is made to case

"Muhammad Akram v. State" (2009 SCMR 230).

All these serious issues created doubts in our mind

regarding the guilt of the accused/appellants beyond

reasonable doubt and these material facts favouring

the accused/appellants were not considered by the

learned trial Court, while appraising the evidence of
-23-

the prosecution. In the absence of truthful,
trustworthy, reliable and confidence inspiring
evidence, the learned trial Court has wrongly not
extended the benefit of doubt to the

accused/appellants.

24. So for as acquitted accused/ respondents

in criminal appeal No.25-A/2014 are concerned,
admittedly all the accused/ respondents except
accused/ respondent Munshi, have been charged for
abetment. The prosecution has badly failed to bring
on record an iota of evidence regarding their
abetment with the principal accused. So for as
accused/ respondent Munshi is concerned, evidence
of complainant and medical evidence with respect to
injuries caused to complainant by  accused/
respondent Munshi have been belied, the learned trial
court has also disbelieved the evidence to the extent
of accused/ respondent Munshi, hence, he has been

rightly acquitted by the learned trial court. Moreover,
-24-

when this court has discarded the evidence of

prosecution with respect to the principal accused, no

case is made out for interference against the

acquitted accused/respondents.

25. In view of what has been discussed

above, We, accept this criminal Appeal No.14-

A/2014 filed by accused/ appellants Mukhtasir and 5

others, as a result whereof, conviction and sentence

recorded by the learned trial court vide judgment

dated 30.01.2014 is set aside and the appellants are

ordered to be acquitted of the charges in case FIR

No.02 dated 04.01.2013, under sections

302/324/109/148/149 P.P.C., at Police Station, Palas,

Kohistan. They shall be released forthwith if not

required in any other case.

26. Murder Reference No.07_ -B/2014

forwarded by the learned trial court for confirmation

of sentence of death inflicted upon the convict

Mukhtasar is answered in NEGATIVE.
-25-

a7. So far as Cr.A No.25-A/2014 against

acquitted accused and Cr. R No. 07-A/2014 for

enhancement of sentence of convicts, both filed by

the complainant Binyamin, for the reasons afore-

stated, the same being devoid of any legal force are

accordingly dismissed.

Above are the reasons of our short order of the

even date.

Announced.
Dt: 28.03.2017

*Azam /PS*
JUDGE

JUDGE
