IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
BANNU BENCH
(Judicial Department)

Cr. Mise: BA No.157-B of 2018.

Rooh Niaz
Vs
The State etc.

JUDGEMENT/ORDER.

Date of hearing 07-06-2018

Appellant-Petitioner: By Pir Liagat Ali Shah
& Farooq Khan

Sokari, Advocates.
Respondent : State By Shahid Hameed

Qureshi, Addl: AG & Others By M. Alamgir

Khan Wazir, Advocte.

SHAKEEL AHMAD, J.- The petitioner Rooh Niaz

S/O Atlas, through the instant petition seeks post

arrest bail in crime report No.86 dated 15.03.2017

registered under sections 302/324/427/34 PPC of

Police Station Domel, Bannu.

IN

The prosecution story as given in the crime

report, is that on 15.03.2017 at 1810 hours, the

complainant brought dead body of his brother

Muhammad Zahid Khan with the help of his co-
villagers to the Police Station, on a Datsun and

reported the matter to the police that his brother was

wanted to the police of Police Station Domel in Crime

report No.211/2015, registered under _ sections

302/324/148/149 PPC. He had called his brother to

hand over him to the police in the said case, tomorrow.

He alongwith his brother came out of home and going

to Chouk Musa Khel on foot. He had given cloth of his

brother to tailor Zainullah for sewing; that at about

1700 hours when they reached at metalled road Waligai

Chouk Musa Khel, he was going on foot on one side of

the road while his brother on the other side of the road.

In the meanwhile, a motor cycle emerged from their

back side and stopped at a distance of few paces after

through passing them. The drivers of the motor cycle

namely Asmatullah S/O Gul Nawaz armed with

Kalashnikov and accused/petitioner Rooh Niaz son of

Atlas armed with repeater deboarded from the motor

cycle,loaded their guns and with the intention to kill his

A/Awan* (S.B) Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad.
brother, fired at him, due to which he was hit and fell

on the ground. After commission of offence, accused

fled away from the spot on the said motor cycle. When

he attended his brother he had already died. From the

firing of accused, one minor namely Sumera Bibi,

daughter of Raza Khan was also hit and sustained

bullet injuries. The motive was alleged in the Crime

report is previous blood feud enmity between the

parties.

3. The petitioner was arrested on

04.04.2018, whereafter he applied for bail in the

Court of the learned Additional Sessions Judge-V,

Bannu, which was declined vide order dated

11.05.2018, hence this petition.

4. It has been contended by the learned

counsel for the petitioner that except mere allegation

in the Crime report there is nothing on record to

connect the petitioner with the alleged crime; that

petitioner is a taxi driver by profession, on the day

A/Awan* (S.B) Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad.
of occurrence he had taken the passengers to

Peshawar and to this effect, the petitioners have

submitted affidavits of passengers and also got

recorded their statements in his favour; that plea of

alibi taken by the petitioner was found favourable

and the investigating officer has declared him

innocent; that charring marks were found on the

dead body of the deceased, which suggests that

firing was made from a very close range, however,

in the site plan distance between the points No. 1 to

3 and | to 4 is recorded as 7 feet, which cannot be

caused from such a long distance, which is

indicative of the fact that it is an un-witnessed

crime; that the prosecution case requires further

probe into the guilt of the petitioner, therefore, he

deserves the concession of bail.

5. Conversely, the learned counsel

appearing on behalf of the complainant and the

learned A.A.G representing the State vehemently

A/Awan* (S.B) Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad.
opposed the contention of the learned counsel for

the petitioner and argued that the petitioner has

specifically been named as one of the offender for

committing murder of brother of the complainant

Zahid Khan and causing bullet injury to the minor

Sumera Bibi; that besides complainant, occurrence

was also witnessed by Raza Khan , Rikshaw driver,

father of injured (Sumera); that plea of alibi taken by

the petitioner is concocted one and afterthought,

therefore not worth consideration at this stage; that

after commission of offence the petitioner remained

at large for a noticeable period; that there is a short

distance of 7 feet between the accused and the

deceased, therefore charring marks can be caused

from such a short distance; that the offence with

which the petitioner is charged , falls within the

prohibitory clause of Section 497 Cr.P.C, therefore

he does not deserve the concession of bail.

A/Awan* (S.B) Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad.
6. I have heard arguments of learned

counsel for the parties and perused the record with

their valuable assistance.

7. The learned counsel for the petitioner in

support of plea of alibi, made reference to affidavits

dated 10-04-2018, sworn by Naeemullah and Akhar

Ali. The affidavits in question have been perused

wherein it was stated that service of petitioner had

been hired by the deponents on 15.03.2017 at 7.00

a.m for the purpose of purchasing motor car from

Peshawar and that he was present with them at

Peshawar, whereafter, the statements of deponents

were recorded by the I.O under section 161 Cr.P.C

on 29.04.2018, and on the basis of affidavits and

statements of the deponents, the petitioner was

declared innocent by the Investigating officer.

8. No doubt plea of alibi like other

defence plea taken at bail stage is essentially

required to be examined by the Court within a

A/Awan* (S.B) Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad.
degree of care and caution. This belated sworning of

affidavits in support of plea of alibi, prima facie

creates an impression that it was after thought.

However, I leave its evidentiary value to be decided

by the learned trial Court after recording pro and

contra evidence.

9. Filing of affidavits, in my view, would

not make a case of further inquiry. This tendency

was taken note of by the august Supreme Court of

Pakistan in a case reported as Mst. Bashiran

Bibi.,.Vs..Nisar Ahmad Khan (PLD 1990 SC-83)

and bail granted on the basis of affidavits was

cancelled. In this case at page-84, it was observed as

under:-

Criminal procedure Code V of (1898).

S. 497(2) ...06 Further inquiry....mere

filing of affidavits by certain advocates

would not attract the impression

“further inquiry nor would it amount

A/Awan* (S.B) Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad.
to two versions....Evidentiary value of
such evidence should be left to be
determined by trial Court.”

In this respect reliance can also be placed on
the case reported as Muhammad Sadiq
.Vs....Muhammad Nisar ( 2003 P.Cr.L.J 209,
Supreme Court at AJ &K), wherein it was held as
under:-

Criminal procedure Code V of (1898).

Ss..497 & 498 --- Affidavit...Plea of

alibi ....Mere filing of affidavits for

establishing the plea of alibi would not
constitute a ground for bail either
before the Investigating officer or to

the Court....such plea has to be

established before the trial Court.

In this behalf reference may also

be made to the case reported as “Abdul

A/Awan* (S.B) Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad.
Haq..Vs..Ghazanfar Ali & 3 others

(PLD 1992 SC -AJ & K-53).

10. Coming to opinion of the IO

declaring the petitioner innocent on the basis of

affidavits furnished by the passengers. It is now

settled that opinion of the I.O is not binding upon

the Courts and cannot be made any basis for

granting bail. In this behalf reference may be made

to the Case reported as Pervez Iqbal ..Vs..The State

(2000 SCMR 1599).

11. It is settled principle of law that at the

bail granting stage the material available on record is

to be sifted through in order to establish whether, on

the face of the record, the accused person before the

Court can be connected to the crime in question,

hence no detail inquiry is to be conducted by the

Court as held in “Gul Hussain’s case _(2009-

P.Cr.L.J-1491).__ In this case certain points have

been agitated by the learned counsel for the

A/Awan* (S.B) Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad.
-10-

petitioner, i,e presence of charring marks on the

body of the deceased, despite the fact that distance

between accused and deceased was 7 feet, which

essentially touches the merits of the case. It is not

denied that deeper appreciation or evaluation of

material at the stage of bail is not permissible for the

grant or refusal of bail and only tentative assessment

is to be made, In this respect reliance is placed on

the case reported as “Mumtaz Vs..The State (2012

SCMR _556) and _ Abdullah Hayee & two

others.. The State (1996 SCMR 556) .

12. The crime in question having taken

place on 15.03.2017, the petitioner was arrested on

04.04.2018, he remained absconder for more than a

year and was declared as proclaimed offender. It is

settled law that fugitive from law loses some of the

normal rights granted by the procedural and

substantive law and _ noticeable abscondence

disentitles the absconder to the concession of bail,

A/Awan* (S.B) Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad.
-ll-

notwithstanding the merits of the case. In this behalf

reliance can be placed on the case reported as

“Muhamad Sadiq..Vs..Sadiq and others (PLD 1985

SC 182). In this case bail allowed by Peshawar

High Court Abbott Abad Bench was cancelled by

the august Supreme Court of Pakistan, wherein

unexplained noticeable abscondence of six months

of the accused was found, same view was expressed

by their Lordship in the cases titled “Awal_ Gul

.Vs..Zawar Khan_& others (PLD 1985 SC 402) &

Ibrahim..Vs..Hayat Gul & others (1985 SCMR

382) and Raza Fazal-ur-Rehman..Vs..Muhammad

Afzal & other (2010 SCMR 179).

In this behalf reference may also be

made to the case reported as Raza Khan ..Vs.. The

State through Advocate General Peshawar &

another (2013 MLD 810).

13. In view of specific charge supported by

the eye-witnesses, medical evidence and un-

A/Awan* (S.B) Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad.
-12-

explained noticeable abscondence _ sufficiently

provide reasonable grounds to believe that the

petitioner is guilty of an offence charged with,

which falls within the prohibitory Clause of Section

497 Cr.P.C.

14. It is pertinent to mention here that after

completion of investigation challan has been

submitted and trial is likely to commence soon. In

such situation, it has all long been settled principle

of law, set by august Supreme Court of Pakistan,

when the trial is likely to commence or has begun,

bail application should not be decided on merits and

the matter be left to the trial Court, lest it may

prejudice case of either side. In this respect, reliance

can well be placed on the cases reported as

Muhammad Sadiq & other Vs.. The State (1980

SCMR 203), Muhammad Ismail..VS.. Muhammad

Rafique & other (PLD 1989 SC 585), Mian Dad

Vs. The State and another (1992 SCMR 1418

A/Awan* (S.B) Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad.
-13-

Said Akbar and another Vs Gul Akhtar & another

C992 SCMR_931) and Shahid Farooq Vs..The

State and others (2011 SCMR 1619).

15. For what has been discussed above,
there is no merits in this petition, which is hereby
dismissed.

It is clarified that any observations
made in this order is tentative in nature, confined
only to the extent of bail matter which would not
influence the mind of the trial Court in any manner
who shall decide the case by applying its own
independent judicial mind after recording evidence.

Announced.
07.06.2018

JUDGE.

A/Awan* (S.B) Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad.
