Judgment Sheet

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, ABBOTTABAD BENCH
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT

Cr.Misc. (BA) No. 322-A/2018
JUDGMENT

Date of hearing...................... 04.05.2018

Petitioner (Mst. Nazima Bibi) By Ms. Rabia Gul Awan, Advocate.

Respondents. (State) By Raja Muhammad Zubair, AAG & (Complainant) By Mr.
Muhammad Javed Khan Turk, Advocate.

he 2 ie 2c 2 ie 2c 2 2g 2 2k 2c 2 2k 2k 2 2 OK

SYED MUHAMMAD ATTIQUE SHAH, J.- Through the
instant petition, the accused-petitioner (Mst. Nazima Bibi),
after having been denied the concession of bail by the learned
Additional Sessions Judge-V Abbottabad vide order dated
31.03.2017, has prayed for post arrest bail in case FIR No. 248
dated 28.10.2017 registered against her under Sections 302 /
109 PPC at Police Station Bagnotar (Abbottabad).

2. Allegations against the accused-petitioner are that she
had committed the murder of her step daughter Mst. Urooj Bibi
by slitting her neck and strangulation.

3. I have heard learned counsel for the parties as well as
the learned Additional Advocate General and gone through the
available record.

4. As the FIR unfolds, it was on 28.10.2017 at 21:30 hours

when the complainant (father of the deceased) reported to local
police of Police Station Bagnotar that he left the house for
labour work in the morning time as usual and when returned
back at 17:00 hours, he saw number of people around his house
and, upon reaching, found the dead body of his daughter Mst.
Urooj Bibi, lying on a cot, who was having violence marks on
different parts of her body with slitting neck; and, upon enquiry,
came to know that his daughter had been killed by his wife, who
is step mother of the deceased, hence, the FIR ibid.

5. Without embarking upon merits of the case that either
the accused-petitioner has committed the crime or not, lest it
may not prejudice the interest of either party at the trial and her
guilt or innocence can be well determined by the learned trial
court after recording evidence, suffice it to say that since the
accused-petitioner has given birth to a male child in the Jail
premises and the law of the land is that the child shall not be
suffered for an offence, which he had not committed; and while
keeping in view the leading judgment delivered by the Hon’ble
Apex Court in the case reported as 1996 SCMR 973 wherein it
was held that jail life is incompatible with environment
necessary for the welfare of a suckling baby, coupled with the
judgment of learned Lahore High Court, Lahore reported as
1998 MLD 1350 Lahore wherein bail was granted on the
ground that welfare of a suckling child should not be made to
suffer in Jail and again while referring another judgment of

Lahore High Court Lahore reported as PLD 2005 Lahore 352
where too the lady accused, charged for murder of her two
minor children, was released on bail on the ground that she was
having a suckling baby, therefore, the accused-petitioner
deserves to be released on bail on this score alone that she is
also having a suckling baby with her in the Jail premises.
Furthermore, the grant of bail does not amount to acquittal of
the accused, as the custody of accused is shifted from judicial
lock-up to the hands of sureties, who are made responsible to
produce the accused before the Court as and when required.

6. Accordingly, this petition for bail is allowed and the
petitioner is directed to be released on bail provided she
furnishes bail bonds in the sum of rupees one lac (Rs.1,00,000/)
with two sureties each in the like amount to the satisfaction of
Illaqa / Judicial Magistrate, who shall ensure that the sureties
are local, reliable and men of means.

Any observations recorded in this order, being purely
tentative in nature, shall in no way prejudice the proceedings
before the learned trial court where the case be decided strictly
on its own merits after recording evidence.

These are the detailed reasons for short order of the

even date.

Announced:
04.05.2018.

JUDGE
LSaif*/
