Judgment Sheet

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
PESHAWAR

(Judicial Department)

Cr.M BA No.11-P/2020
Kashif Vs The State & another

Date of hearing: 31.01.2020
Mr. Niaz Ali Khan Jhagra, Advocate, for the petitioner.
Mr. Fawad Faisal, Advocate/Standing Counsel, for the State.

Mr. Arif Ullah, Advocate along with complainant.

JUDGMENT

AHMAD ALI, J. Through the instant petition, the petitioner
(Kashif), seeks his post arrest bail in case FIR No.752 dated
04.12.2019 under sections 365-B/376-PPC, PS SI Abdul
Hameed Shaheed Shabqadar (District Charsadda). Same
relief was however, declined to him by the learned Trial Court,
vide order dated 20.12.2019.

2. Brief facts of the case are that, initially, the
complainant, vide DD No. 17 dated 26.11.2019, reported to
the local police that on 25.11.219 at about 1:00 hrs his
daughter namely Zuhra (aged about 17/18 years) went out of
the house, on her return to house, she was inquired who told
that she had gone to the house of one Kashif; On 26.11.2019,
she again left her house and took away with her one tola
gold. She was searched but in vain. Upon her recovery, the
complainant and victim recorded their statements u/s 164

Cr.P.C on 04.12.2019, wherein they charged the present
accused for inducing her and committing zina with her.
Accordingly, FIR ibid was registered against the accused,
hence the instant petition for bail.

3. Arguments of learned counsel for the parties heard and
record gone through with their able assistance.

4. Perusal of record reveals that the victim twice left her
house on 25" & 26" November, 2019, but the present
accused-petitioner was not charged by the complainant in his
initial report rather he was charged by the abductee vide her
statement recorded under section 164 Cr.PC, on 04.02.2019,
when she was brought from Dar-ul-Aman at Punjab. Medical
examination of the victim was also conducted on the same
day, wherein no sign of recent intercourse was found on the
private parts of the body of the victim.

5. Except the solitary statement of abductee, no other
incriminating evidence is available on record to prima facie
connect the present accused-petitioner with the commission
of crime. Likewise, no other eyewitness has been cited so as
to support her version or the version of complainant coupled

with the fact that FSL report regarding the swab is negative.

6. The main ingredient of section 365-B is also missing
in the instant case because it has not been mentioned by the
abductee that through what means she was abducted.

Moreso, the accused has not confessed his guilt yet.
7. In view of the above facts and circumstances, case of
the petitioner squarely falls within the ambit of Sub-Section
(2) of Section 497 Cr.P.C. calling for further inquiry in the
matter; and in such like cases grant of bail is to be considered
as a matter of right and not as a matter of grace or
concession.

8. Besides provision of 164-B Cr.P.C, provides as under:-

[164-B DNA Test.-(1) Where an offence under section 376,
section 377 or section 377-B of the Pakistan Penal Code, 1860
(Act SLV of 1860) is committed or attempted to have been
committed or is alleged to have been committed, Deoxyribo
Nucleic Acid (DNA) samples, where practicable, shall be
collected f
rom the victim with his or her consent or with the consent of his
or her natural or legal guardian and the accused during the
medical examinations conducted under section 164-A within
optimal time period of receiving information relating to
commission of such offence.
(2) The DNA samples collected under sub-section (1) shall at the
earliest be sent for investigation to a forensic laboratory where
these shall be properly examined and preserved:

Provided that confidentiality of such examination shall
at all time be observed.]

Apparently, no compliance with the above provision of law
has been made because no samples for DNA tests have been
obtained either from the accused-petitioner or victim despite
the fact that the word “shall” is used in the said provision,
making its applicability mandatory. The prosecution must
keep in mind this aspect while dealing with such like
offences in the best interest of the accused as well as the
victim. In view of the negative FSL report, nothing left with
the prosecution except to comply with the above provision in

support of its version.
9. Moreover, investigation in the case is complete and
accused-petitioner is no more required to the prosecution for
the very purpose. He is behind the bars since his arrest,

therefore, his further incarceration in jail will serve no useful

purpose.

10. Apart from the above, it has been held time and again
by the august Supreme Court that bail does not mean
acquittal of accused but only change of custody from
Government agencies to the sureties, who on furnishing
bonds take responsibility to produce the accused whenever
and wherever required to be produced. Reliance could be
placed on case reported in 2008 SCMR_ 807 “Haji
Muhammad Nazir Vs State”.

11. Before parting with this order, this court finds it
necessary to mention that all the observations recorded above
are tentative assessment just for the disposal of bail petition
and not intended to influence the mind of trial Court, which
is free to appraise the evidence strictly in accordance with
law and merits of the case.

12. For what has been discussed above and on tentative
assessment of material available on record, a case arguable
for the grant of bail is made out, consequently, this bail
petition is allowed and accused-petitioner, named above, is

admitted to bail provided he furnishes bail bonds in the sum
of Rs.200,000/- with two sureties each in the like amount to
the satisfaction of learned Illaqa/Duty Judicial Magistrate,
who shall ensure that the sureties are local, reliable and men
of means.

13. Above are the reasons of short order of even date.

Announced:
31.01.2020

JUDGE

Amjad, PS SB Hon'ble Mr. Justice Ahmad Ali
