IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
PESHAWAR,
[Judicial Department].

Cr. A No.243-P/2020

Abdullah son of Gulzar,
t/o Sheikh Kaley, Mathra, Peshawar.

Appellant (s)

VERSUS
The State
Respondent (s)
For Appellant (s) :- Mr. Fida Muhammad Afridi, Advocate..
For State - Mr. Muhammad Nisar Khan, AAG.
Date of hearing: 13.09.2021
JUDGMENT

ROOH-UL-AMIN_ KHAN, __J:- The instant Criminal Appeal
under section 48 Control of Narcotic Substances Act, 1997, filed
by Abdullah, the appellant, has been referred to me under section
429 Cr.P.C., as difference of opinion has arisen between my
learned brothers Mr. Justice Mohammad Ibrahim Khan and
Mr. Justice S.M. Attique Shah, Hon’ble Judges of the Division
Bench.

2. Before reappraisal of evidence and giving my
independent view, I deem it appropriate to give a brief resume of
the prosecution’s case.

3. According to First Information Report (FIR) Exh.PA, on

17.01.2019 at 1045 hours, Alamgir Khan SHO (PW.6) along with

(
re Constables Asif No.657 and Shah Saeed No.259, during routine

patrolling, intercepted a Motorcar bearing Registration

No.8250-LRB at the place known as “Doubble Phatak”, coming
ye!

from Nowshera’s side. On query, its driver disclosed his name as
Abdullah (appellant). On search of the motorcar, Alamgir Khan
SHO (PW.6), recovered six and four packets of heroin, each
weighing 1 Kilogram, total 10 Kilograms, from secret cavities
made in the switch-board and front door, respectively. CNIC in
the name of appellant, a Nokia mobile set, registration book of
the motorcar and Rs.2800/-in cash, were recovered from personal
search of the appellant. The Seizing Officer, separated 01 gram
from each packet as sample for chemical analysis by the FSL and
sealed the same into parcels No.1 to 10. He also sealed the
remaining quantity into a separate parcel No.11 and affixed three
seals having the monogram HY on each parcel. He took into
possession the recovered contraband heroin Exh.P.2 along with
articles recovered from personal possession of the appellant and
the motorcar Exh.P.1 vide recovery memo Exh.PW.5/1 in
presence of its marginal witnesses, drafted Murasila Exh.PW.6/2
and sent the same to the Police Station through Constable Asif,
on the basis of which FIR Exh.PA was registered against the
appellant. He also drafted application Exh.PW.3/6 for sending the
samples to the FSL.

4. Raza Khan SI (PW.3) conducted investigation in the
case, who proceeded to the spot and prepared site plan Exh.PB at
the instance of Seizing Officer (PW.6), obtained physical custody
of the appellant from the Court of competent jurisdiction,
interrogated him and recorded his statement under section 161

Cr.P.C. He verified the motorcar from the concerned quarter vide
ae

applications Exh.PW.3/3 and Exh.PW.3/4, respectively, placed
on file the FSL report qua the motorcar, docket with regard to
samples Exh.PW.3/6, receipt of FSL report Exh.PW.3/7 and
extract of register No.19 Exh.PW.3/8. He also placed on file the
FSL report qua the samples Exh.PZ, recorded statements of the
PWs under section 161 Cr.P.C. and on completion of
investigation handed over case file to the SHO, who submitted
challan against the appellant before the learned trial Court.

5. On receipt of challan, the appellant was summoned from
Jail and after compliance of the provisions of section 265-C
Cr.P.C., he was formally charge-sheeted to which he pleaded not
guilty and claimed trial. To prove its case, the prosecution
examined as many as eight witnesses and after closure of the
prosecution’s evidence, statement of the appellant was recorded
under section 342 Cr.P.C., wherein he denied the prosecution’s
allegation and professed his innocence. However, he declined to
be examined on oath or to produce evidence in defence. On
conclusion of trial, the learned trial Court, after hearing both the
sides, convicted the appellant under section 9 (c ) CNS Act, 1997
and sentenced him to undergo rigorous imprisonment for eight
years and to pay a fine of Rs.1,00000/- or in default thereof to
further undergo 06 months simple imprisonment vide judgment
dated 09.03.2020, in case FIR No.27 dated 17.01.2019, under
section 9 (c ) CNS Act, 1997, Police Station Risalpur. Benefit of

section 382-B Cr.P.C. was extended to him.
6. The appellant questioned his conviction and sentence
before this court through Cr.A. No.243-P/2020, which was heard
by the Hon’ble Division Bench on 16.07.2020, however, due to
equal division of opinion of Hon’ble Judges of the Bench, the
appeal has been referred to me in terms of section 429 Cr.P.C. for
opinion as a Referee Judge.

7. I have heard the exhaustive arguments of learned counsel
for the parties and perused the record with their able assistance

8. It appears from record that Alamgir Khan SHO is the
complainant and Seizing Officer of the instant case. He while
appearing as PW.6, in his examination-in-chief, reiterated the
same story of the arrest of appellant and recovery of contraband
heroin from secret cavities of Motorcar bearing registration
No.LRB.8250, being driven by the appellant at the relevant time.
The facts narrated in the FIR, have already referred in the earlier
part of the judgment, therefore, to avoid repetition, the same are
not reproduced. He deposed that after drafting Murasila
Exh.PW.6/2, the same was handed over to Constable Asif
No.657, who took the same to the Police Station for registration
of the case. In cross-examination he stated that only case property
was sent to the Police Station and not the accused and that when
the Investigating Officer (1.0) reached, the accused was available
at the spot, however, the case property was not available. Kifyat
Ullah ASI (PW.1), who has registered FIR Exh.PA on the basis
of Murasila brought by Constable Asif, in cross-examination

while contradicting the testimony of the Seizing Officer (PW.6)
stated that “Accused and case property were brought to the
Police Station along with Murasila and were handed over to
Moharrir of the Police Station and I made entry in daily diary
about the arrival of the accused and the case property at 1230
hour after lodging the FIR”. Constable Shah Saud No.259
(PW.5), marginal witness to the recovery memo Exh.PW.5/1,
says that when the I.0 reached, the appellant, contraband heroin
and the motorcar were available at the spot and after completion
of investigation, the accused along with case property was handed
over to the I.O, who shifted him the Police Station. Raza Khan SI,
is the I.O of the case. He while appearing as PW.3 in
cross-examination stated “when I reached the spot, the case
property and the accused were not available. The accused and
case property were already sent to the Police Station by the
SHO. At the time of my departure from Police Station to the
spot, I had not seen the accused and the case property in the
Police Station. I cannot say that through whom the accused and
case property were shifted to Police Station before my arrival to
the spot”. Wali Rehman MHC while appearing as PW.4 deposed
that complainant SHO himself brought the case property along
Y with parcels to the Police Station and handed over the same to
a him and in this respect he made entry in register No.19 copy of
which is Exh.PW.3/8. In cross-examination he states that accused

and the case property were brought to the Police Station at 1315

hours and that when the Murasila was brought to the Police

Station without accused and case property. He admitted it correct
that in daily diary No.18 dated 17.01.2019, it is mentioned that
only accused was brought to the Police Station and put in the
lockup of the PS. Nothing is mentioned in the said daily diary
with regard to the contraband heroin and the motorcar. He further
admitted that in Exh.PW.3/8 it is not mentioned that when and
from whom the case property was received and when and through
whom the samples were sent to the FSL. Constable Najeeb Ullah
who took the samples to the FSL, while appearing as PW.7
deposed that Madad Moharri of the Police Station handed over
him parcels No.1 to 10 for onward transmission to the FSL,
however, he has not put his signature in the relevant column of
Register No.19 Exh.PW.3/8. In the Murasila the time of
occurrence is shown as 10.45 a.m and time of report as 12.10
p.m., whereas Constable Shah Saud (PW.5), the purported
eyewitness, in cross-examination states that they consumed 40/45
minutes at the spot and returned to Police Station at 11.30 a.m.
and thereafter never visited the spot. If the time of report in the
Murasila drafted at the spot is 12.10 p.m. then return of the
Seizing Officer and marginal witness to Police Station at 11.30
a.m. is beyond the comprehension of a prudent mind. Contrary
Raza Khan SI/I.O. (PW.3), states that investigation of the case
was handed over to him at 1240 hours and he reached the spot at
1245 hours and remained there along with complainant and PWs
for about one hour and thirty minutes ic. from 1245 to 1415
hours. After spot inspection he returned to Police Station whereas

the complainant and PWs left the spot for gusht. The testimony of
the LO. totally contradicts the statement of Constable Shah Saud,
marginal witness to the recovery memo. Besides, according to
daily diary No.18 (ibid), the accused was brought by the
complainant SHO (PW.6) and put in the lock up of Police Station
at 1315 hours. How the Seizing Officer remained present at the
spot with the Investigation Officer from 12.45 to 1415 hours, is
yet another disturbing aspect damaging the prosecution’s case.

9. The contradictory statements of the material and star
witnesses of the prosecution, namely, Alamgir Khan SHO
(PW.6), Constable Shah Saud (PW.5), Raza Khan SI/I.0 (PW.3),
Wali Rehman (PW.4), and Najeeb Ullah (PW.7) coupled with
daily diary No.18 dated 17.01.2019, create serious doubt qua
seizing of the alleged contraband, arrest of the appellant, shifting
the case property from the spot to the Police Station and brining
the vehicle and the appellant their handing over to Moharrir of
the Police Station. Each one of the witnesses has furnished
totally a different stance with regard to shifting of the appellant,
the alleged recovered contraband heroin and the motorcar to the
Police Station. There appears no chain from the prosecution
evidence qua safe custody and transmission of the samples from
the spot to the FSL. Constable Asif who brought the Murasila to
the Police Station might have clarified the aforesaid disturbing
situation, but astonishingly, he was abandoned by the prosecution
for no good reason. Similarly, the Madad Moharrir who handed
over the samples in parcels No.1 to 11 to Constable Najeeb Ullah,

has also been abandoned for no good reason. In the judgment
/
’

reported as (2018 SCMR 2039), the Hon’ble Supreme Court has
held that:-

“Chain of custody began with the recovery of
the sized drug by the police and included the
separation of the representative sample(s) of
the seized drug and their dispatch to the
Narcotics Testing Laboratory. Said chain of
custody was pivotal as the entire construct of
the Control of Narcotic Substance Act, 1997
and the Control of Narcotic Substances
(Government Analysts) Rules, 2001 rested on
the report of the Government analyst, which in
turn rested on the process of sampling and its
safe and secure custody and transmission to
the Laboratory. Representative samples of the
alleged drug must be in safe custody and
undergo safe transmission from the stage of
recovery till it is received at the Narcotics
Testing Laboratory. Prosecution must
establish that the chain of custody was
unbroken, unsuspicious, indubitable, safe and
secure. Any break in the chain of custody or
lapse in the control of possession of the
sample, would cast doubts on the safe custody
and safe transmission of the samples(s) and
would impair and vitiate the conclusiveness
and_reliability_of the report of the
Government_Analyst, thus, rendering it
incapable __of __sustaining__conviction.
(emphasis supplied).
10. In case titled, “Abdul Ghani and others vs the State

and others” (PLJ 2019 SC (Cr.C) 462) the Hon’ble supreme

Court, without discussing the merits of the case, on the sole
ground of missing chain of safe transmission of the samples from
the spot till receipt in the FSL and non-production of the relevant

witnesses in whose custody the samples remained, allowed the
appeal and acquitted the convicts/appellant by setting aside the
concurrent findings of the two courts below. Relevant paragraph
of the judgment (supra) is reproduced below for the sake of
convenience and ready reference:-

“There is hardly any occasion for discussing
the merits of the case against the appellants
because the record of the case shows that safe
custody of the recovered substance as well as
safe transmission of samples of the recovered
substance to the office of the Chemical
Examiner had not been established by the
prosecution in this case. Nisar Ahmad,
S.I/SHO complainant (PW.1) had stated before
the trial Court that he had deposited the
recovered substance at the Malkhana of the
local Police Station but admittedly the
Moharrir of the said Police Station had not
been produced before the trial Court to depose
about safe custody of the recovered substance.
It is also not denied that Ali Sher HC, who had
delivered the samples of the recovered
substance at the office of the Chemical
Examiner had also not been produced during
the trial so as to confirm safe transmission of
the samples of the recovered substance. It has

already been clarified by this Court in the cases

of the State through Regional Director ANF

y Imam Bakhsh and others (2018 SCMR

x 2039), Ikram Ullah and others vs the State
“f (2015 SCMR_ 1002) and Amjad Ali v_the
oe State (2012 SCMR 577), that in a case where

safe custody of the recovered substance or safe
transmission of samples of the recovered
substance is not proved by the prosecution

through independent evidence there it cannot

be_ concluded _that_the prosecution had
succeeded in establishing its case against the
appellants beyond reasonable doubt. The
10

case in hand suffers from the sale legal defect.
This appeal is, therefore, allowed, the
convictions and sentences of the appellants
recorded and upheld by the courts below are set
aside and they are acquitted of the charge by
extending the benefit of doubt to them”. (Bold
and underlines supplied emphasis).

11, Yet there is another aspect of the case, the FSL report
Exh.PZ reveals that Chemical Examiner has not specified
protocols of the test applied to each sample which was the
mandatory requirement under Rule 6 of the Government
Analysts) Rules, 2001. In the judgment dated 18.12.2019,
rendered in case titled, “Qaiser Javed Khan vs the State through
Prosecutor General Punjab Lahore and another” the Hon’ble

apex Court has held that:-
“The report of the Government Analyst in the
instant cases does not specify the protocols of the
tests applied and thus does not meet the
requirements of the law as interpreted by this
Court in the cases of Imam Bakhsh and Khair ul
Bashar (supra). The said Report cannot be relied
upon for conviction of the petitioner. Therefore,
the petition is converted into appeal and allowed.
The conviction and sentence of the petitioner are
set aside. He shall be released forth if not
of” / required to be detained in any other case”.

12. Another serious damaging aspect of the prosecution’s
case is that according to FIR, the Seizing Officer, namely,
Alamgir Khan SHO (PW.6), recovered ten packets each

containing 1000 grams heroin, total 10 Kilograms, but during
11

trial on the request of the learned defence counsel, the case
property was opened/de-sealed and weighed. The learned trial
court observed the weight of ten packets of heroin as 980, 1004,
1000, 988, 1010, 1002, 982, 1036, 1006, and 922 grams each,
resepectively. By considering the glaring difference in the
weightment of packets, it is quite strange that some of the packets
were exceeding 1000 grams and some were considerably less
than the quantity shown in the Murasila, recovery memo and FIR
as well as by the PWs in their statements. The Seizing Officer or
any other prosecution witness could not furnish any explanation,
much less plausible, to clarify and justify the difference in the
weight of each packet of contraband heroin.

13. Another doubtful side of the prosecution case is that,
Alamgir Khan SHO (PW.6) in cross-examination admits that his
signature on the recovery memo, Murasila and arrest card of the
appellant is different from his signature over the complete challan
and it happened because of rush of work. He further admitted that
these documents are not in his handwriting, rather were drafted
by someone on his dictation, however, he does not remember the
name of the person who drafted the said documents. As per
contents of Murasila at the time of occurrence only Constable
Shah Saud and Asif were accompanying the Alamgir Khan SHO,
out of whom the latter has been abandoned and the former has
been examined as PW.5. In cross-examination, Constable Shah
Saud denied drafting of Murasila, recovery memo and arrest card

of the appellant on the dictation of Alamgir Khan SHO by
of!

12

someone. Raza Khan SI/I.O. (PW.3) when confronted with the
recovery memo, Murasila and arrest card of the appellant, he
admitted it correct that signature of Alamgir Khan SHO on the
said documents is different from one another. He deposed that the
said documents were prepared in his presence on the dictation of
the SHO. However, he also could not name the person who
drafted these documents. The contradictory statements of the
three PWs on the factum of preparation of Murasila, recovery
memo and arrest card of the appellant create serious doubts in the
prosecution’s case and pinch a prudent mind that the occurrence
has not taken place in the mode and manner as alleged in the FIR.
Person who drafted these documents on the dictation of the SHO
is still unknown. Similarly, if these documents were prepared in
the presence of I.0. by the SHO, then it suggests that the I.O was
present with the Seizing Officer before the occurrence. It would
not be wrong to say that where a law is strict in nature and
provides severe punishment, then its application and evidence in
proof of the guilt of an accused requires strict adherence for safe
administration of justice.

14. On reappraisal of evidence, I have reached to an
irresistible conclusion that prosecution has miserably failed to
prove the guilt of the appellant through cogent and confidence
inspiring evidence beyond the shadow of reasonable doubt. The
prosecution evidence is pregnant with doubts benefit of which is
to be given to the appellant/accused as a matter of right. It is

settled law that prosecution is duty bound to prove its case
C)

i

13

beyond any reasonable doubt and if any single doubt is created,
benefit of the same must got to the accused and entitled him for
earning acquittal as the accused is always considered the most
favorable child of law. Guidance in this regard can be derived
from case titled, “Tariq Pervaz Vs the State” (1995 SCMR
1345) and case titled, “Muhammad Akram Vs the State (2009
SCMR 230) and Faryad Alis 20 case (2008 SCMR 1086).
Basically, it is the principle enshrined in Islamic jurisprudence,
fourteen hundred years ago that “it would be better to acquit
ten culprits than convicting one innocent soul.” which has now
been transformed into the form of the principle that, “acquitting
by error would be better than convicting by error”. The said
commandment has evolved into the theory of benefit of doubt,
which, invariably, is extended to the accused for safe
administration of criminal justice.

15. Accordingly, I while extending benefit of doubt to the
appellant, allow this appeal, set-aside his conviction and sentence
under section 9 (c ) CNS Act, 1997, recorded vide judgment
dated 09.03.2020 and hereby acquit him from the charge in case
in case FIR No.27 dated 17.01.2019, Police Station Risalpur. He
be set at liberty forthwith if not confined in any other case.

16. Before parting with the judgment, I deem it appropriate
to mention here that it would be injustice to kept mum on the
conduct of the PWs in the case of recovery of huge quantity of
heroin weighing ten Kilograms, who are either incompetent or

have intentionally damaged the prosecution’s case for extraneous
14

reasons or monetary gain or have either falsely implicated the
appellant. The Public Prosecutor has also abandoned or not
produced an important witness, without any reason. Whatever the
reality may be but it is high time to inform the high ups of Police
Department to look in to the matter and proceed the delinquent
Officer(s)/Official(s) under the law.
17. The worthy Additional Registrar (Judicial) of this Court
is directed to sent copy of this judgment to the worthy Inspector
General of Police (IGP), Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and DIG/RPO,
Mardan Region, well as the DPO & the SSP (Investigation),
Nowshera, along with copy of record of the case and statements
of the PWs with the direction to look into the matter and proceed
the delinquent PWs stringently under the law, under intimation to
this Court.

\
Sia) api PS 0?

Senior Puisne Judge

Mr, tice Rooh ul Amin Khan Hon’ nior Puisne Judge
