PESHAWAR HIGH COURT ABBOTTABAD
BENCH

JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT
JUDGMENT SHEET

Cr. A No. 71-A/2008
Date of hearing 10.01.2023.

Appellant/s (Sheraz Khan) by Miss. Ayesha
Bibi, Advocate.

Respondent/s (The State and complainant) by
Sardar Ali Raza, AAG.

Respondents/accused byMr. Shad Muhammad
Khan.

FAZAL SUBHNAN, J. Through this criminal

appeal filed under section 417(2) Cr. P.C in
case FIR No. 52 dated: 13.02.2005 under
section 302/324/337-F(11)/34 PPC, Police
Station, Saddar Haripur, the
appellant/complainant has impugned the
judgment of learned Sessions Judge-III,
Haripur dated: 31.10.2008 vide which
respondents/accused were acquitted from the
charges levelled against them.

2. Fact of the case in brief, as narrated in
the first information report, are that on
13.02.2005 at about 1815 hours,
complainant/Sheraz Khan Son of Babu Khan,
in injured condition, reported the matter to the

police in Emergency Ward DHQ Hospital
Haripur to the effect that he alongwith his
sister-in-law, Mst. Nazima Shaheen and Javed
son of Phul Pervaiz, his relative, were going
together to Haripur and it was about 04:30
PM, when they reached near the house of
Babu Nazir, there Babu Nazir, he being empty
handed, his son Muhammad Usman alias
Jabran, with 30 bore pistol, Rashid Mehmood
alias Raju also having 30 bore pistol and
accused Babar Ali alias Papa, sons of
Nazakat, having an axe, were present and
when they reached near the accused, Babu
Nazir started abusing them, who were
refrained whereupon, he commanded his
companions to kill them. In the meanwhile,
Babar Ali alias Papa gave axe blow to Javed,
resultantly he was injured on the right side of
his head. Accused Muhammad Usman alias
Jabran fired at Mst. Nazima Shaheen with 30
bore pistol and as a result she got injured on
right side of her ribs whereas Rashid
Mehmood alias Raju fired at the complainant
Sheraz Khan with his 30 bore pistol which
landed on left side of his hips and all of them

got injured. Motive for the occurrence was
described by the complainant to be an
altercation between Javed and Babar Ali,
which took place some 4/5 months back but
was settled by the elders. That on the sound of
firing and their hue and cry, Muhammad
Aslam son of Ghulam Haider and Muhammad
Pervaiz son of Muhammad Akbar were
attracted to the spot and had witnessed the
occurrence and shifted the injured to the
hospital. The report lodged by the
complainant was incorporated into murasila
ExPA/1, and thereafter, into FIR Ex.PA. It is
pertinent to mention that Mst. Nazima
Shaheen died after some 38 days of the

occurrence and Section 302 PPC was also

added to the charge.
3. Arguments heard and record perused.
4. It is well settled law that prosecution,

who bring an allegation against accused
person/s on a capital charge has to prove the
same through cogent, convincing and
conscious inspiring evidence, leaving no room
for doubt.

5. In the instant case, it is story of the

prosecution that complainant alongwith
injured Javed and Mst. Nazima Shaheen were
proceeding to Haripur and when at about
04.:30 PM, they reached near the house of
respondents No.1 to 4, respondent No.4 Babu
Nazir started abusing them who was asked to
desist from this act, who immediately asked
the other respondents to kill them and acting
upon his Lalkara, accused Babar alias Papa,
armed with Axe, hit Javed on his left side of
his head, Usman alias Jabran fired with his 30
bore pistol on Mst. Nazima Shaheen which
landed on right side of her ribs while Rashid
alias Raju fired with 30 bore pistol on the
complainant and as a result he was hit on his
buttock and due to firing and hue and cry
Muhammad Aslam son of Ghulam Haider and
Muhammad Pervaiz son of Muhammad Akbar
their co-villagers arrived to the scene of
occurrence and saw the entire episode and
later on shifted them to DHQ Hospital
Haripur.

7. From the contents of FIR, it is clear that
besides the complainant, the occurrence was
witnessed by Javed Akhtar son of Phul

Pervaiz, Muhammad Aslam son of Ghulam
Haider and Muhammad Pervaiz son of
Muhammad Akbar and being the eye
witnesses of the occurrence, they were
expected to be consistent and coherent in their
statements.

8. Careful scrutiny of the statements of
prosecution witnesses, however, reveals that
all the PWs are closely related to each other
and therefore, in that case their testimony was
to be considered with due care and caution as
no other independent witness is cited to have
seen the occurrence. Statement of
complainant Sheraz Khan reveals that he has
attributed respective role to the respondents
No.1 to 4, as narrated in the FIR. In his cross
examination he replied that respondent Babar
inflicted axe blow to PW Javed while standing
in front side. He further replied at the time of
occurrence and inflicting injury to PW Javed
he was standing on eastern side of the house
of Babu Nazir, whereas, Babar was standing
on the western side from the house of Babu
Nazir respondent. Similarly, in response to a
question, he relied that at the time of firing on

him accused Rashid was standing towards
eastern side of the respondent Babu Nazir
while he was standing toward western side.
He further replied that he and Rashid were
very close to each other and the distance may
be about 01 feet and that he and Rashid were
facing each other at the time of fire at him and
he (Rashid) was in front of him when he fired
at him and received fire there in the same
position. He further replied that respondent
Rashid did not fire at any other PWs or other
person inspite of their intervention. He
answered that they grappled with respondent
Rashid and Usman and tried to snatch the
pistol but could not do so. He also replied
that the distance between Mst. Nazima
Shaheen and Muhammad Usman at the time
of firing was about 2/3 paces. He also
answered that Mst. Nazima Shaheen did not
lost conscious and remained in her senses
after receiving of fire shot till her arrival in
the hospital, and that when he reached the
hospital in injured condition Mst. Nazima
Shaheen was already taken to Abbottabad
Hospital after being provided medical

treatment and on his arrival to the hospital
Mst. Nazima Shaheen was not present in the
hospital. He in later part of his cross
examination admitted it correct that as per his
report, Usman alias Jabran fired only one shot
at Mst. Nazima Shaheen which hit her on
right rib.

9. PW-Muhammad Javed Akhtar in his
statement described the incident in almost the
same manner and in cross examination he
answered that about 4/5- months prior, a
quarrel took place between him and Babar
respondent and that after the above incident
no quarrel has taken place between them. He
answered that after the occurrence he and
Mst. Nazima Shaheen reached to the hospital
together and first she was examined by the
doctor in his presence and was shifted to
Abbottabad Hospital and Sheraz was also
there at the time who came alongwith them to
the hospital. He also replied that Mst. Nazima
Shaheen was in senses till her examination by
the medical officer. In response to another
question he replied that at the relevant time
the distance between Rashid & Sheraz were |

to 2 paces, whereas, distance between Mst.
Nazima Shaheen and Usman was 2 to 3 paces.
He also replied that Rashid respondent fired
only one fire shot on Sheraz and that accused
Usman also fired only one shot which hit her
at her right rib and that no other fire was made
by Rashid or Usman or any other person on
Mst. Nazima Shaheen.

10. PW-4 Muhammad Aslam also revealed
the event with all minor details and stated to
have seen the entire occurrence. He also
added that he is also marginal witness to the
recovery memo Ex.PW4/1 through which the
IO sealed the empties and blood stained sail
into parcel. During cross examination he was
confronted with his statement recorded under
Section 161 Cr.P.C and it was found that he
has not stated the details of the act done by
each of the accused at the time of occurrence.
He described the entire events that took place
at the relevant time and active role played by
each of the accused but when confronted with
his statement, it was found that in his
statement under Section 161 Cr.P.C he has not
given such detailed account of the occurrence.

In his cross-examination, it was confirmed
that two empties were recovered from the spot
and that the shirt of Mst. Nazima Shaheen was
having one bullet mark and on the dupatta
towards lower side.

11. The medical officer PW-05 Tariq
Naseem Ejaz had examined all the injured on
13.02.20105, first examined Mst. Injured
(now dead) Nazma Shaheen and has reported
three bullet injures on her person as
following.

1. Fire arm injury grazing wound
sized I % cm in diameter, situated on
right side just below rib. The skin and
subcutaneous fat damaged. No
blackening or touting present.

2. Fire arm entry wound just above
to wound No.1. the size is about 5 ml
in diameter, marginal are inverted and
show blackening. There is hole of fire
arm on Shirt at the site of the injury.
Bleeding is present from the wound.

3. Fire arm entry wound in right
hypochondrum sized about 5 ml in
diameter. Margins inverted and
blackening present on inner margins.
The corresponding holes present at the
site of fire arms injury on shirt.
Similarly, he examined Muhammad
Javaid s/o Phul Pervaiz and noted the

following injures;-
10

1. Fire arm entry wound on left
glottal region sixed about 5 ml
in diameter. The margins were
inverted showed ring of
blackening. The hole was
present on the trouser at the site
of fire arm injuries which was
also blood stained.

2. The exit wound sixe 1 cm in
diameter, with margins everted
and profuse bleeding occurred.
The hole of fire arm injury was
present on corresponding site of
injury. The shirt which was light
black in colour was signed and
handed over to police. The
parent was admitted in male
surgical ward.

12. From the due consideration of
statements of prosecution witnesses, as
discussed above, it is clear that prosecution
has failed to prove their case through
conscious inspiring evidence. The occurrence
allegedly took place at 04:30 PM and report
was lodged at 18:15 hours. It is the
prosecution version that PW-4, Muhammad
Aslam and Muhammad Pervaiz reached the
spot of occurrence as soon the quarrel started
and allegedly they tried to intercept the

accused party, which means that if the
11

prosecution story is accepted to be true, then
both these persons were present at the time of
quarrel and injuries sustained by the injured,
but they took about two hours to shift the
injured to the hospital, when admittedly the
spot of occurrence was near to the Pakka road
where vehicles ply regularly. Thus, time was
consumed in lodging the report and inference
can be drawn that report was lodged after due
deliberation and consultation to rope all their
opponents in the case.

13. Record further reveals that the
prosecution story is not supported by the
medical evidence. PWs, Sheraz Khan, in his
report attributed the role of axe blow to
respondent, Babar Ali, and one fire each to
respondents Muhammad Usman and Rashid
Mehmood, resulting injuries one each to Mst.
Nazma Shaheen and complainant Sheraz
Khan. In their statements they consistently
replied that respondent Muhammad Usman
and Rashid Mehmood had fired one fire each,
which hit Mst. Nazma Shaheen and Sheraz
khan. In contrast to the above, it is in the

evidence of PW-5 Dr. Naseem Ejaz that Mst.
12

Nazma Shaheen received three (3) fire shots,
one grazing injury on arm, another fire arm
injury just above the wound No. 1 and third
on right Hypochondrum with corresponding
holes present on the shirt. Thus, the medical
evidence is in startling contrast to the ocular
account forwarded by the complainant and
PW Muhammad Javed regarding the number
of fire received by the deceased Mst. Nazima
Shaheen.

14. From the evidence, it is clear that at the
time of alleged firing, PW Sheraz Khan and
respondent Rashid Mehmood were right in
front of each other but the injury sustained by
him is on left glottal region which is posterior
to the pelvis (between the hip bones) which is
again not possible when complainant was
facing the respondent Rashid Mehmood. It is
also to be mentioned that injury on the head of
injured Muhammad Javed Akhtar is incised
wound on the left side of the head with 2cm to
5 ml, which is very small wound as compared
to the allegation of axe blow. It has also been
noticed that, he too was allegedly present in

front of respondent Babar Ali but his injury is
13

described by the medical officer on left side
of the head and not on the front side. More so,
the said injury is so small that it is not
believable that after full blown axe blow, he
only received a very small wound. Thus, in
our view, the medical evidence does not
corroborate the prosecution story. In this
respect reliance is placed on the case of
Tajamal Hussain Shah-Versus- The State and
another reported in 2022 SCMR_ 1567,
wherein, it has been held that: -

“The ocular account in this case
is furnished by Zulfiqar Ahmed
(PW-18) and Muhammad Daraz
(PW-19). According to these PWs
of the ocular account, the
petitioner while armed with .30
bore pistol made a straight fire
shot on Muhammad _ Sajjad,
deceased, which landed on his
chest, due to which he fell down
and ultimately succumbed to the
injury. However, this stance is
contradicted by the _ medical
evidence. According to Dr.
Raheem Khan (PW-15), who
conducted postmortem
examination of the deceased
Muhammad Sajjad, the injury on
the chest, just above the nipple of
the deceased, was an exit wound
and the margins of the wound
were black whereas the entry
wound was on the back of the
deceased i.e. at thoracic spine.
The blackening around the
wound shows that the fire shot
would have been made from a
close range but according to the
14

site plan, the petitioner was

shown standing at a distance of

18 steps away from the deceased.

This major discrepancy raises

serious doubts on the credibility

of the prosecution witnesses of

the ocular account.”
15. The prosecution story described two
fire shots resulting injury to complainant
Sheraz Khan and Mst. Nazima Shaheen and
as per recovery memo Ex.PW-4/1 two alleged
crime empties were recovered from the spots
of respondents Muhammad Usman and
Rashid Mehmood. The deceased Mst. Nazima
Shaheen had 3 bullet wounds on her person
and therefore recovery of only two empties
does not commensurate the number of injuries
of the two injured. Allegedly, a 30 bore pistol
P-2 was recovered on the pointation of
respondent Usman, which was sent to the FSL
for analysis along with two alleged crime
empties and the report thereof Ex.PW-9/5
reveals that the pistol was without firing pin,
hence, no comparison could be made. The
other 30 bore pistol and axe, allegedly used in
the offence, were not recovered to have

conclusively proved that these were used in

the commission of offence. Though shirt and
15

shalwar of the two injured were sent to the
FSL and it is opined that these contained
human blood and were positive report,
without any other supporting material on the
record, would not connect the respondents
with the alleged crime.

16. From the statements of PWs Sheraz
Khan, Javed Akhtar and Muhammad Aslam,
it is clear that their statements were not only
contradictory but these also suffers from
willful improvements. The site plan
Ex.PW9/1 was prepared on the pointation of
eye witnesses, but in their statements PW-
Sheraz Khan and Javed have misdescribed the
presence of each and every respondent as well
as their own spot. In his cross-examination
PW Sheraz Khan replied that at the time of
occurrence and inflicting injury, Javed was
standing on eastern side of the house of Babu
Nazir whereas Babar was standing on western
side whereas in the site plan the spot No.4
given to respondent Baber is towards south of
the house of Babu Nazir and PW Javed
Akhtar is further towards north of Babar. In

his initial report, PW Sheraz has not stated
16

anything about the grappling of Muhammad
Aslam and Muhammad Pervaiz but Sheraz
Khan in his cross examination has stated that
on arrival to the spot the said PWs grappled
with the respondents. It is in the FIR that on
hearing fire shot and hue and cry, the PWs
Muhammad Aslam and Muhammad Pervaiz
were attracted, whereas, PW Muhammad
Aslam, who in his statement recorded under
section 161 Cr.P.C has not mentioned
anything about seeing the entire incident, has
recorded full-fledged statement, stating to
have seen the entire occurrence. In our view
there exist material contradiction in the
statements of these witnesses and at the same
time they have made willful improvements in
their court statements to bring the case in line
with prosecution story, hence, their testimony
is not free from doubt, and in the absence of
independent corroboration, their statements
cannot be believed to be true and reliable.

17. It is evident from the record that on
16.02.2015 statement of Mst. Nazima
Shaheen was recorded during investigation by

the IO, after gaining her consciousness,
17

wherein she charged respondent Usman for
making firing upon her and causing injures
upon her person. Mst. Nazima Shaheen, later-
on died in the hospital and her autopsy was
conducted on 21.03.2005. on scrutiny of her
statement, it is observed that Mst. Nazima
Shaheed died after some 38/39 days of the
occurrence. She remained alive for sufficient
time, hence, having no _ immediate
apprehension of death, hence, her statement
cannot be considered as dying declaration.
Dying declaration is a statement which a
person made, under the belief that as he/she is
to depart to the world hereafter, hence, the
person would make a true statement without
advancing the cause or reason of his/her
death. Record reveals that there was no reason
for an injured person to give each and every
details of the occurrence in such a situation,
however to authenticate such statement, the
IO was required to have recorded the
statement of the concerned medical officer of
the hospital to confirm that Mst. Nazima
Shaheen was conscious and well oriented in

time and space and that it was a voluntary
18

statement to implicate the respondent for the
crime. Thus, in all, the statement of Mst.
Nazima Shaheen recorded after 38 days of
occurrence does not qualify to be accepted as
dying declaration. In the case of Mst. Zahida
Bibi-Versus-The State reported in PLD 2006
SC 255 while deliberating on this aspect the
August Supreme Court of Pakistan has held
that; -

“The rule of criminal
administration of justice is that the
dying declaration like the
Statement of an interested witness
requires close scrutiny and is not
to be believed merely for the
reason that dying person is not
expected to tell lie. This is a matter
of common knowledge that in
such circumstances in preference
to any other person, a doctor is
most trustworthy and _ reliable
person for a patient to depose
confidence in him with the
expectation of sympathy and better
treatment to disclose the true facts.
In the present case, in the manner
in which the statement of deceased
was recorded by the Sub-
Inspector, would seriously reflect
upon its correctness and
consequently, could not be
considered worthy of any credit to
be relied upon as_ aying
declaration. The perusal of record
would show that the two courts in
complete departure’ to _ the
principles of appraisal of evidence
and the rule’ of criminal
administration of justice, held the
petitioner guilty of the charge on
the basis of hearsay and shaky
19

evidence.

18. From the detailed discussion on
different aspects of the case, it is held that the
learned Trial court, after considering the
material brought on record, has properly
appreciated the record and We have found no
illegality or irregularity in recording acquittal
in the case, hence, the impugned judgment
being unexceptionable is maintained and the
appeal in hand being meritless, stands
dismissed.

Announced.

10.01.2023.

Date of writing judgment
17.01.2023

Muhammad Tariq Stenographer

JUDGE

JUDGE

Hon’ble Justice Wigar Ahmad & Hon’ble Justice Fazal Subhan.
