















ORDER SHEET
IN THE HIGH COURT OF SINDH, BENCH AT SUKKUR

Crl. Bail. Application No.S- 153 of 2021

 
1.     
For Orders on office objection. 
2.    
For hearing of Bail Application
22-04-2021.
            Mr. Muhammad
Ali Napar, advocate for applicant. 
Mr. Aftab Ahmed Shar, Additional Prosecutor
General. 
>>>>>>>…<<<<<<<<
Irshad Ali Shah, J;- It
is alleged that the applicant with rest of the culprits committed death of
Punhoon by strangulating his throat and causing him butt blows, for that the
present case was registered.
2.         The applicant on having been refused
post-arrest bail by learned Additional Sessions Judge Pano-Aqil, has sought for
the same from this Court by way of instant bail application u/s 497 Cr.P.C.
3.         It is contended by learned counsel for
the applicant that applicant being innocent has been involved in this case
falsely by the complainant in order to satisfy his dispute with him over landed
property; the FIR of the incident has been lodged with the delay of about four
days and the applicant on investigation was found by the police to be innocent,
therefore, he is entitled to be released on bail point of further inquiry. 
4.        Learned APG for the State has opposed to
release of the applicant on bail by contending that he has actively participated
in commission of incident. 
5.         I have considered the above arguments
and perused the record.
6.        The FIR of the incident has been lodged
with delay of about four days; such delay having not been explained plausibly could
not be over looked. As per post mortem report of the deceased the probable time
between injuries and his death may be about five hours. It belies the
complainant in his FIR by stating that the deceased died within his sight, soon
after receipt of injuries. On investigation, the applicant was found to be
innocent by the police. The parties are disputed over landed property. In these
circumstances, the guilt of the applicant is calling for further inquiry. 
7.         In view of above, the applicant is
admitted to bail, subject to his furnishing solvent surety in the sum of rupees
two lacs and P.R bond in the like amount to the satisfaction of learned trial
Court. 
8.        Instant Cr. Bail Application is disposed
of in above terms.
 
Judge
Nasim/Steno.
 
 



