Judgment Sheet

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, ABBOTTABAD
BENCH
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT

WP No. 1242-A/2016.
JUDGMENT
Date of hearing............... 20.04.2017... 0... cece eee ee ee

Petitioner/s._ Raheel and others through Sajjad Afzal Khan __

Respondents. _ State through AAG

SYED MUHAMMAD ATTIQUE SHAH, J.- The petitioner,

invoked the writ jurisdiction of this Court under Article 199 of
the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973, for
declaration to the effect that impugned order/warrant of arrest
bearing No. 1328-33/3MPO/READER/DC (M) dated:
23.12.2016 issued by the Deputy Commissioner, Mansehra
(respondent No.2) whereby the petitioner was ordered to be
detained for a period of 30 days under section 3(1) of the West
Pakistan Maintenance of Public Order Ordinance, 1960 on the
so called ground of prejudicial to public order safety and
tranquility constant threat to the law and order of the area and
indulging in activities to defuse the writ of the government is
arbitrary, fanciful, discriminatory, unconstitutional and without
lawful authority, hence, liable to be struck down.

2. The brief and essential facts leading to the
institution of this constitutional petition are that the petitioner

being a law abiding citizen and is a bonafide resident of village
Phul Keri has assailed the impugned order/warrant of arrest
dated 23.12.2016, issued by the respondent No.2 under section
3 MPO, which is illegal, based on malice and malafide, just to
harass and humiliate the petitioner and thus liable to be struck
down.

3. Learned counsel for the petitioner argued that the

petitioner is law abiding citizen and never remained involved in

any kind of illegal and unwarranted activities. Respondents No.

3 and 4, due to their personal malice and malafide have allegedly

shown involved the petitioner in unlawful activities, which has

no basis and footing. He prayed for setting aside the impugned

letter of respondent No. 3 as well as impugned notification

dated: 23.12.2016 issued under section 3 MPO by respondent

No. 2.

4. Learned Additional Advocate General fully

supported the impugned detention order issued by respondent

No. 2 and prayed for dismissal of instant writ petition.

5. Arguments heard and record perused.

6. The respondent No. 4 appeared in pursuance of pre-

admission notice dated: 07.03.2017 and produced copies of FIRs

registered against the petitioner and stated that due to registration
of these FIRs the impugned letter was written to respondent No.

2, who thereafter, issued the impugned order dated: 23.12.2016.

Respondent No. 4 was categorically asked by the court that

whether the petitioner is involved in any activities, prejudicial to

the public order, safety and tranquility, or is indulged in the

activities, challenging the writ of the state, to which his reply

was in negative.

7. From the FIRs, attached with the petition, it

transpires that petitioner has been charged in different FIRs

under different sections of law and he is facing prosecution in

the same. Apart from the FIRs, attached with the petition the

respondent No. 4 is not in possession of any other concrete and

tangible material/ evidence in support of letter dated:

20.12.2016, sent by respondent No. 3.

8. The impugned order of detention has been based on

three grounds:-

i. He is acting pre-judicial to public order, safety
and tranquility.

ii. He has posed, constant threat to the law and
order of the area.

iii. He is indulging in activities to defuse the writ
of the government, thus posing threat to public

peace in the area.
9. The respondent No.4 has failed to produce any

sufficient tangible material/evidence in support of letter dated:

20.12.2016 of respondent No. 3.

10. Order under section 3 of the Ordinance ibid cannot

be based on conjectures and surmises, rather it should be based

on concrete and tangible evidence. Moreover, the grounds on the

basis of which detention order of a person is issued/passed, that

must have the support of sufficient cogent material and only

thereafter, it would satisfy the issuance of preventive order.

Furthermore, the material/evidence must be of such a nature and

character to persuade and satisfy an ordinary prudent person to

justify the order of preventive detention. It is the consistent view

of the superior courts of the country that a person cannot be

deprived from his liberty on a flimsy/shaky and insufficient

material/evidence. Wisdom in this respect drawn from PLD

2003 Supreme Court 442. Wherein, it is held:-

“Tt can be concluded safely that satisfaction
can only be based on some evidence or
record justifying the detention order which

is badly lacking in this case’.
In the above cited judgment the apex Court has
thrashed out the entire law available on the subject. Reliance can
also be placed on PLD 2016 Peshawar 89. Wherein it is held:-

“Needless to say that it has consistently been
held umpteen times by the Courts that
powers under section 3 MPO could not be
invoked for detention of persons on the
grounds other than provided for by the law.
As such, preventive detention of a person
who is either accused of an offence or
convicted for a crime would not only amount
to double jeopardy but would also militate
against the spirit of the relevant law,
prescribing procedure and penalties for
commission of offences, as resort to
preventive measures is useful only before
commission of the offence and not after the
offence has been committed, where-after
case is registered and legal process for

prosecution of the perpetrator is initiated”.

11. Article 9 of the Constitution provides for the
security of the person “No person shall be deprived of life and
liberty save in accordance with law”. Now under the
provision of section 3 of the Ordinance ibid, the authority which
is issuing preventive detention order under section 3 of MPO,

must satisfy itself that material/evidence produced before him
are sufficient to justify the detention order, without it, it would

be violative of Article 9 of the Constitution. Wisdom is derived

from 2004 MLD 1541, wherein it is held that:-

“To my mind, life and liberty of citizens is too
much important, no person can be deprived of
this precious liberty, unless allegations against
him are prima facie proved from the record. In
the instant, case prima facie this court is of the
view that these allegations against the
petitioners are not proved from the record in
hand after making tentative assessment of the
evidence”.

Wisdom is further derived from 2004 P.Cr.L.J. 1604,

wherein it is held that:-
“Tt is well settled now that even the Constitution
of Islamic Republic of Pakistan provides that no
person shall be deprived of life, liberty save in
accordance with law. Indeed the State has to act
within the limits of law wherever, the life or

liberty of individual is affected”

12. From the impugned order of detention it transpires

that respondent No. 2 has not applied his independent mind to

the alleged material produced before him, rather he has

mechanically issued the impugned order on the letter of

respondent No. 3, which is untenable under the law.

13. From the available record it clearly manifest that

the impugned letter No.5061/PA dated: 20.12.2016 of
respondent No. 3, as well as order of preventive detention issued

by respondent No. 2 is violative of Article 9 of the Constitution.

14. Keeping in view the above stated facts and

circumstances of the case, this court reached to the conclusion

that the preventive detention order of respondent No. 2 is illegal,

unlawful and issued without application of independent mind,

hence, the same is set-aside and struck down.

Announced:
20.04.2017.
JUDGE

JUDGE

(Tahir)
