JUDGMENT SHEET
PESHAWAR HIGH COURT
PESHAWAR

JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT

Writ Petition No.3450-P/2015 with CM No.378-
P/2018
Attiq-ur-Rahman Vs SHO etc

Date ofhearing 05.12.2019

Malik Nasrum Minallah, Advocate, for the
petitioner.

Syed Qaiser Ali Shah, AAG, for the State.

Syed Abdul Fayaz, Advocate, for police officials.

JUDGMENT

AHMAD ALI, J. Through the petition in hand,

filed under Article 199 of the Constitution of
Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973, the petitioner
(Attiq-ur-Rahman) has prayed this Court for the
following relief:-

“It is, therefore, most humbly prayed
that on acceptance of this writ petition
the impugned order dated 21.09.2015 of
the learned respondent No.5 may very
kindly be set aside and respondent No.1
may very kindly be directed to register
FIR against respondent No.2 and 3
under the relevant sections of law.

Any other relief which this
Hon’ble Court deems fit in the
circumstances may also be granted in

favour of the petitioner.”

2. Brief facts of the case, as per averments

made in the petition, are that on 06.07.2015, the
petitioner and his wife were standing in front of
their house and in the meanwhile respondent No.2
accompanied by 03 muffled faced persons came in
a vehicle with tinted glasses and aimed their
weapons at petitioner and his wife. They directed
them to get into the vehicle and upon their refusal
they abused and beat them and thereafter dragged
them into the vehicle. The petitioner and his wife
started hue and cry whereupon the passerby
attracted to the spot, therefore, they were let free
upon their intervention. After a while, they once
again attempted to throw the petitioner into the
vehicle. Motive behind the story narrated by the
petitioner is that there is a land dispute between
him and respondent No.2, therefore, he tried to
pressurize the petitioner by misusing of his
authority. The petitioner approached the local
police for registration of FIR against respondent
No.2 & 3, but in vain. Thereafter, the petitioner
knocked the door of the learned Justice of Piece
through application u/s 22-A Cr.P.C, for the said
purpose, but his application was dismissed vide
judgment dated 21.09.2015 impugned herein
through the instant petition.

3. Respondents were put to notice to file their

comments which they have furnished wherein
issuance of the writ asked for was strongly

opposed.

4. Arguments of the learned counsel for the
parties heard record perused with their able
assistant.

5. The petitioner has though come up with
certain allegations against respondents, but perusal
of record reveals that on the day of occurrence
respondent No.2 had come to University Campus
in connection with some admission matter, who
was being chased by a suspected motorbike rider
with muffled face. Sensing security threat, he
apprehended the suspected chaser, who after
removal of his mask was found to be his neighbor
(present petitioner) with whom the respondent
admitted to have a civil dispute over landed
property/plot. The petitioner could not tender any
explanation for chasing the official vehicle of
police officials. Accordingly, he was handed over
to local police of University campus and the matter
was also brought into the notice of high-ups. In
this respects comments of respondent No.2 are
placed on file which are duly supported by a sworn
affidavit.

6. Perusal of record further reveals that upon

the complaint of petitioner, the local police also
lodged report vide DD No.36 on the same day
(06.07.2015). Thereafter permission of concerned
Judicial Magistrate u/s 156(3) Cr.P.C was sought
for conducting proper inquiry to substantiate the
allegations of the petitioner, therefore, his
contention of being not entertained by the local
police is discarded.

7. During the course of inquiry, Statements of
those persons, who at the time of occurrence were
present at the spot, besides watchman and other
police officials, were recorded, wherein the
allegations levelled by the petitioner stood not
proved coupled with the fact that the CCTV
footage also did not support his version. Prima
facie on the pretext of civil dispute, the petitioner
himself had tried to drag the respondent No.2 into
courts and indulge him in criminal proceedings.

8. So far as, presence of the wife of petitioner
at the time of occurrence is concerned, this
contention of the petitioner has also become
baseless, when, admittedly, she was found present
on her duty at girls hostel (her place of posting) at
the relevant time. The record further depicts that
other complaints made by the petitioner in this
regard have also been consigned being not proved

and baseless.
9. The whole above analysis of the matter
shows that proceedings in due course of law were
already taken up in the matter in issue and when
the Magistrate had already taken cognizance
thereof and has proceeded with it in due course of
law, filing of subsequent petition u/s 22(A) Cr.P.C
seems to be just hamper the process of law as well
as the enquiry proceedings before  Illaqa
Magistrate. The provision of 22(A) Cr.P.C are not
meant for providing shortcut to the interesting
parties but are invoked when police functionaries
are avoiding to perform the legal duties while as
per record, proceedings were already initiated in
due course of law in the present matter. In this
regard reliance could be safely placed on case law
reported in 2016 P.Cr.L.J 1733.

10. So, by cutting the cackle and in view of the
facts and circumstances of the case and scrutiny of
record appended, we are of the firm view that the
impugned order of the Ex-Officio Justice of Peace,
Peshawar, has not only been validly passed but is
also in accordance with law, as such, needs no
interference of this Court under the writ
jurisdiction. Resultantly, the instant writ petition,

which merits no consideration, is dismissed,
accordingly. Thus, CM No.378-P/2018, has

become infructuous, which is also dismissed.

ANNOUNCED;

05.12.2019
JUDGE
JUDGE

Amjad, PS, DB Justice Musarrat Hilali & Mr, Justice Ahmad Ali
