JUDGEMENT SHEET

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
BANNU BENCH
(Judicial Department)
WP. No. 935-B/2019,

1. Abdul Wahab s/o Qalam khan 2. Muhammad Farooq s/o Abdul Rehman
both r/o Zarki Nusrati, Tehsil Takht-e-Nasrati District Karak...Petitioners.

Versus
Naeem Khan and 5 and others...w.ssnsseoneneneee «ReSpondents.
JUDGEMENT
Date of hearing: 09.02.2022
For petitioners: - Mr. Sawal Nazir Khan, Advocate.

For official respondents: Haji Umar Daraz Khan, Advocate.

MUHAMMAD NAEEM ANWAR, |: The petitioners through instant
petition filed under Article 199 of the Constitution of Islamic
Republic of Pakistan, 1973, challenged the validity of order dated
18.05.2019 passed by learned Additional Sessions Judge, Takht-e-
Nasrati in complaint case No.05/2018 whereby complaint of the
petitioners filed under section 3 of the Ilegal Dispossession Act,

2005 has been dismissed being not maintdinable.

02. Brief facts of the case are that petitioners/complainants
namely Abdul Wahab and Muhammad Farooq filed a complaint
under section 3 of the Illegal Dispossession Act, 2005 against the
respondents/accused to the effect that they are owners in
possession of sufficient agricultural property situated at Minzini
Banda Tehsil Takht-e-Nasrati, District Karak. Gul Mueed and Gul
Sabdullah are cultivating their property. Complainant No.1 used to
live in Baluchistan and Lahore in connection with his business
while complainant No.2 is lawyer by profession and is practicing

at Peshawar. The accused/respondents No.1 to 4 have illegally
dispossessed the complainants from the land and started
construction of the house thereon. That the said act of the
respondents is an offence under sections 3/4 of the Illegal

Dispossession Act, 2005, hence the complzint.

03.  Onreceipt of the complaint, learned trial Court directed the
SHO concerned to inquire into the matter and submit inquiry
report within the meaning of section 5 of the ibid Act. The report
of SHO was received on 06.11.2018, wherein the complainant No.2
submitted an application that the SHO had not recorded their
statements accordingly, the SHO was directed to record their
statement. On 22.12.2018, learned counsel for complainants
submitted an application for requisitioning of correct report and
necessary directions were issued on the same. On 11.02.2019
respondents/accused No.1 to 4 appeared and contested the
complaint through their counsel. The lezrned trial after hearing
both the parties on the point of maintainability, dismissed the
complaint of the petitioners/ complainants being not

maintainable, hence the instant writ petition.

04. Learned counsel for petitioner while making
reliance on case titled “Mst. Gulshan Bibi and others Vs.
Muhammad Sadiq and others” (PLD 2016 SC 769) “Shaikh
Muhammad Naseem Vs. Mst. Farida Gul” (2016 SCMR 1931)
contended that the findings of the learned trial Court, whereby the
complaint of the petitioners was declared as not maintainable on
the ground that both the parties were co-sharers in the suit
property, are against the law as the provisions of section 3 are the

terms ‘land grabber’, ‘Qabza Mafia’ or ‘Qabza Group’ may not be
restricted to a trespasser, it may be even a co-sharer who by the
use of force has dispossessed the other co-owner and possessed
the property illegally as such he would definitely be declared as a
‘land grabber’, ‘Qabza Mafia’ or ‘Qabza Group’, therefore, the
complaint filed by the petitioners was required to be decided after

recording of evidence.

05. As against that, learned counsel for respondents while
referring to the contents of complaint évailable at page No.24,
contended that in the application/complaint no description of the
property or boundary thereof were mentioned. He contended that
respondents are the owners in the property regarding which
earlier the petitioners have filed an application under section 3
read with sections 5 and 7 of Illegal Dispossession Act which has
been adjourned sine die and that a suit fo: recovery of possession
through partition was filed by the petitioners before Civil Court
wherein they were directed to approach the Court of competent
jurisdiction. In the plaint of civil suit, the petitioners have prayed
for recovery of possession through partition and in the application
filed on 20.07.2019 they have alleged their dispossession from the
disputed property manifests that they were not in possession of
the suit property and on one way or the other they are intending
to get possession from the co-owners through process of court by
filing of complaint, which is permissible only through regular suit
for partition and that too from the Court of competent jurisdiction.
Muhammad Farooq, petitioner No.2 also appeared before the
Court and contended that he is a practicing lawyer, has been
dispossessed from the disputed property and the only way is to

file a complaint under the Illegal Dispossession Act, 2005 but the
learned trial Court without adverting to the legal aspect has
dismissed the complaint which could only be decided after

recording of evidence.
06. Arguments heard and record perused.

07. It appears from the contents of the complaint that Abdul
Wahab, petitioner No.1 is running his business at Lahore whereas
petitioner No.2 is a practicing lawyer and settled at Peshawar. The
complaint consists upon 7-Paras but astonishingly neither any
Khasra number, Khata number or the boundaries of the property,
especially the portion thereof which was forcibly possessed from
them by the respondents nor other particulars were mentioned in
the complaint. The contents of this petition reveals that the
petitioners alleged to have been dispossessed from the property
measuring 21x1000 feet as per Khaka Tasveeri, annexed with the
instant petition, but that too without giving description or any
field number of the property. Moreso, no specific date is
mentioned in Khaka Tasveeri, annexed with the instant petition or
even in the contents of the complaint. However, a report
submitted by Patwari dated 05.11.2018 reveals that the property
bearing Khasra No.7596/6044 measuring 29-kanal 02-marla,
Khasra No.6039 measuring 20-kanal 13-marla , Khasra No.6038
measuring 134-kanal 16-marla, Khasra No.6037 measuring 17-
kanal 18-marla and Khasra No.6041 measuring 62-kanal 02-marla
were inspected by him whereby Abdul Wahab, petitioner No.1
deposed that he is owner in possession of 11/12-kanal and Naeem
Khan is in possession of 72-kanal whereas these properties are

joint ownership amongst other co-owners. Learned counsel for
petitioners is correct to the extent that as per the law settled by
the apex Court that ‘land grabber’, ‘Qabza Mafia’ or ‘Qabza Group’
shall not be restricted to a trespasser but a co-sharer may fall
within the definition of land grabber but the question before this
Court as to whether without description ‘of the property and the
alleged encroachment with reference to the particular area,
complaint was maintainable and could be decided on the basis of
recording of evidence. It was for the petitioners to have
specifically mentioned that which portion of the property was
forcibly/illegally possessed from them as nentioned in the instant
petition. We are of the view that without mentioning the
description of the property, the person against whom the
allegations were leveled even cannot defend his possession.
Khasra Girdawari in the instant case is available on record which
shows the possession of respondents. Rel: “Gulfam Ahmed Versus
Additional Sessions Judge, Gujranwala ‘ind 3 others” (2011 P.
Cr. LJ 487), “Azizullah Versus Nizamuddin and another” (2021

YLR 2327).

08. Furthermore, the suit for partition was filed by the
petitioners, was returned to them with the direction to submit the
same before an appropriate forum. The application earlier field by
the petitioners seeking initiation of criminal proceedings under
sections 3, 5 and 7 of the Act of 2005 refers that the respondents
are in possession of the property whereas the petitioners are not.
They have tried to get the possession of the property through a
suit for recovery of possession but was not filed before the Court
of competent jurisdiction as such it was returned to them. They

have also submitted earlier an application in which the
proceedings were adjourned sine die and thereafter the instant
petition. The aim of the petitioners by filing the complaint is
nothing but to get the possession of their property but the nature
of it is joint and their suit for recovery of possession was returned
with the direction to file it before proper forum. It is settled
position of law that what is not permitted to be done directly

cannot be achieved through circumvention of law by indirect

means. Rel: “Muhammad Hanif Abbasi versus Imran Khan Niazi
and others” (PLD 2018 SC 189). & Zulfigar Ahmed Bhutta and
15 _other: i Pakistan through Se

irs an ”

(PLD 2018 SC 378), “Muhammad Saeed Versus. The Secretary
Health and others” (2018 PLC (CS) N 39), “Shahzadi Umerzadi
Tiwana Versus Province of Punjab and others” (2018 CLC 641),

Bagh and 19 others” (1994 MLD 632 SC AJK), “Karamat Ali
Khan and another versus Sardar Ali and 29 others" (PLD 2001
SC AJK 30), “Messrs. Dewan Petroleum (Pvt) Limited Versus
Executive Director, SECP and another” (2017 CLC 1237).
Though proceedings could be initiated against the land grabber
and a co-sharer may be included in the definition of ‘Qabza Mafia’
but for which the complainant must place before the Court with
reference to a specific area, alleged to ‘have been encroached
upon/illegally possessed from the complainants but nothing is
there available on record even to support the contention of the

petitioners. The possession of the respondents being recorded in
Khasra Girdawari and the above narrated facts led to a definite
conclusion that respondents are in possession of the property and
petitioners are intending to recover it from them, to the extent of
their proprietorship but the modus operandi is not correct. It was
essential for the complainants to give all the material particulars
with regard to act of illegal dispossession in the complaint itself. In
the absence of material particulars, exact time and date of the
alleged act of dispossession, no inquiry is to be conducted by the
learned trial Court to ascertain whether or not the complainants

were dispossessed in terms of Illegal Dispossession Act, 2005.

09. Though the petitioner pressed it hard that they will prove
their case through recording of evidence however, when the
particulars of dispossession were not given in complaint no useful
purpose will be served by remanding the matter to the lower
Court. Learned trial court has properly assessed the fact of the
case to which the learned counsel for the petitioners could not
point out any illegality. Admittedly, respondents are the owners on
the strength of certain mutations whereby they have purchased
the property from the owners in possession reference whereof is
available in column No.5 as “Badastoor’. The vendors of the
petitioners were the owners in possession from whom the
respondents have purchased the property through different

mutations and this version is supported by the Khasra Girdawari.

10. Learned counsel for petitioners has not been able to point
out the grounds under which the instant petition could be
entertained without specification of particulars i.e., the property,

the date of dispossession, the details of area illegally

possessed/Khasra numbers and other necessary elements.
Likewise, the petitioners have not able to point out any illegality,
irregularity or jurisdictional defect in the impugned judgments as

such this petition being without substance is hereby dismissed.

09.02.2022.
J
JUDGE

thsan* “

Y

{D.B) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Sahibzada Asadullah &
/ jon’bie Mr. Justice Muhammad Naeem Anwar

y’
fai
0 1 MAR apt | |

