Kifayat/*

JUDGMENT SHEET

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
D.IL.KHAN BENCH
(Judicial Department)

W.P. No.55-D/2017 with
C.M. No.65-D/2017.

Muhammad Irfan
Vs.
D.P.O. etc.
JUDGMENT
Date of hearing: 03.10.2017.

Appellant-Petitioner by Mr Ghulam Muhammad
Sappal Advocate.

Respondent by Mr. Kamran Hayat Khan Miankhel

AAG.
SHAKEEL AHMAD, _J.- Through instant

constitutional petition, the petitioner Shafi Ullah, seeks
quashment of FIR No.21 dated 16.01.2017, registered
under Sections 5/6 of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (N.W.F.P.)
Prevention of Gambling Ordinance, 1978 of police
station City, District D.I.Khan.

2. Brief facts of the case are that on the basis
of spy/prior information, the SHO of police station
City, Abid Iqbal, raided the Baithak of one Haji Javed
Baloch and found the petitioner and co-accused busy
gambling inside the Baithak. He arrested them and also
recovered gaming amount. On seeing the police party,

accused Muhammad Irfan, Abda, Muhammad Rustam
Kifayat/*

-2-

and Muhammad Aslam fled away from the spot, while
accused Shah Jehan, Saeed Ahmad and Mehrban were
arrested.

3. It has been argued by the learned counsel
for the petitioner that under Section 8 of Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa (N.W.F.P.) Prevention of Gambling
Ordinance, 1978, the SHO could not carry out search
of any place and register the case about which he has
reason to believe that it is being used as common
gaming house and that the action taken by him was
illegal, without lawful authority and without
jurisdiction.

4. The learned AAG representing the State,
admitted that the impugned action of the SHO is in
conflict with Section 8 of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa
(N.W.F.P.) Prevention of Gambling Ordinance, 1978.
5. We have given our anxious consideration
to the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for
the parties and perused the record/case law with their
able assistance.

6. In order to appreciate the point raised by
the learned counsel for the petitioner, it is expedient to

reproduce Section 8 of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa
Kifayat/*

-3-

(N.W.F.P.) Prevention of Gambling Ordinance, 1978,
which reads as under:-

“8. Power to enter and search. If a
District Magistrate, | Sub-Divisional
Magistrate, Magistrate of the First Class
upon information and after such enquiry
as he thinks necessary, has reason to
believe that any place is used as a
common gaming-house, or that an
offence under section 6 is being
committed at or in any place, he may;
(a) enter such place at any time with
such assistance as he may require and
using such force as may be necessary;
Provided that, if such place is in
the actual occupancy of a woman who
according to custom, does not appear in
public, the officer so entering such place
shall give notice to her that she is at
liberty to withdraw and, after allowing
reasonable time for her to withdraw and
giving her reasonable facility for
withdrawing may enter the place;
(b) search such place for any instruments
of gaming kept or concealed therein, and
also the person of all those who are
found in that place, except the women;
(c) seize and take possession of gaming
moneys and securities for money and
articles of gaming which are found
therein or upon any person found therein;
and
(d) take into custody all persons, except
women, found in that place, whether or
not then actually gaming.

7. Although, under the provision of Section
103, Cr.P.C, police officer is competent to make search
of the premises in connection with the offence reported
to him, but the Ordinance being a special law,

provisions for search of any premises made out in
Kifayat/*

-4-

section 8 thereof are to be complied with in letter and
spirit. The Ordinance being a special law will override
the provisions of Code of Criminal Procedure which is
a general law and the Ordinance provides particular
authorities which only are competent to carry out a
search in order to find out any place or premises is
being used as a common gaming-house. The District
Magistrate or the Sub-Divisional Magistrate or the
Magistrate First Class may while making a search of a
premises for the purposes of section 8 of the
Ordinance, require police assistance in carrying out the
job but a Police Officer is not competent to make out a
search under Section 8 of the Ordinance. With the
introduction of recent local self Govt. system and
necessary amendments in various law, the offices of
D.M. and S.D.M. are no more in existence, with the
result that only the Magistrates of 1* Class can
supervise the raid in such like circumstances, whereas
in the instant case the raid was conducted by SHO in
the absence of the Magistrate. The procedure adopted
and raid conducted by the SHO police station City,
D.I.Khan in the Baithak owned by Haji Javed Baloch,
was entirely against the provisions of Section 8 of

Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (N.W.F.P.) Prevention of
Kifayat/*

-5-

Gambling Ordinance, 1978 and was illegal, without
lawful authority and without jurisdiction. Requirement
of law is that search is to be conducted by a Magistrate
of 1° Class, but it was conducted by the SHO, which is
in conflict with the provisions contained in section 8 of
the ibid Ordinance. Needless to mention that it is well
established principle of law that when an action is
required to be taken in a particular manner, that can
only be taken in that way. Reliance can well be placed
on the case (Abdur Rauf and 8 others Vs. The State
(1990 P.Cr.L.J-1694.

8. For what has been discussed above, we
accept this petition, declare the impugned action of the
respondent No.3 as illegal and without jurisdiction and
quash the FIR in question.

Announced.
Dt: 03.10.2017.

MUHAMMAD AYUB KHAN
JUDGE

SHAKEEL AHMAD
JUDGE
