PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, PESHAWAR
ORDER SHEET

Date of Order of other Proceedings with Signature of Judge.
Order of
Proceedings
1 2
17.02.2021 | Writ Petition No.4799-P/2020.

Present:

Mr. Muhammad Muazzam
Advocate for the petitioner.

Mr. Arshad Ahmad, AAG for the

respondents.

38K

MUHAMMAD _NAEEM__ ANWAR, _ J.-

invoking constitutional jurisdiction of this Court,
under Article 199 of the Constitution of the Islamic

Republic of Pakistan, 1973, the petitioner has prayed

for the following relief: -

“Tt is therefore, very humbly requested that
this Honorable Court may please grant an
appropriate writ, as submitted hereinafter:

a.

To declare that the life, reputation,
property, liberty and movement are the
fundamental rights as guaranteed in
Article 4, 9, 14 and 19 of the
Constitution of Pakistan and as he is
facing group of individuals involved in
interest based transaction therefore it
would be for the enforcement of his
fundamental right and in view of
circumstances being faced by him, it
would be lawful if joint investigation
team is appointed including financial
experts to inquire into such transaction
and fix the responsibility and charged
them according to law.

The respondent No.2 may be directed to
form a joint investigation team
including the financial experts to fix the

responsibility upon the individuals
involved in interest based transaction in
contravention of Provision of Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa Prohibition of Interest on
Private Loans Act, 2016 (Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa Act No. XVII of 2016).

c. To direct the respondents to provide
security to the petitioner to save his life,
reputation, property, liberty and
movement.

d. Any other relief found appropriate may
also be granted to the petitioner.”

02. Learned counsel for the petitioner contended
that petitioner is the sole owner, founder and Chief
Executive of the school system known as Institute of
Computer and Management Sciences, which has its
branches and franchises throughout the province and
for the achievement of its targets / goals such as
quality education on modern standards, the petitioner
has invested a huge amount to develop the
infrastructure, marketing and in doing so, he was
trapped by money launders on interest based
transactions wherefrom the petitioner has returned
the capital amount and huge profit thereon but even
then he is facing harassment by the money launders
from whom Muhammad Ayub Khan, Muhammad
Javed, Izzat Khan, Imtiaz, Hameed, Pir Tahir and
Ismail have fraudulently obtained number of cheques
on account of management of schools through

facilitator and now they are pressurizing him through

different means regarding which he has filed an
application before Ex-Officio Justice of Peace under
section 3 (1) of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Prohibition of
Interest on Private Loans Act, 2016 which is still
pending adjudication. He added that a civil suit was
also instituted against Haji Abdul Nawaz Afridi for
declaration, perpetual injunction and compensation
for the loss allegedly caused for harassment of staff
and management of school. He contended that
petitioner is entitled for protection of his
fundamental right as enshrined in Articles 4, 9, 14 &
19 of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of
Pakistan, 1973 and while making reliance on the
judgment of this Court rendered in Writ Petition

No.2173-P/2016 titled “Sajid Ali vs. DPO Mardan”

dated 15.06.2016 requested that joint investigation
team may be appointed for resolution of the
controversy and fixation of the responsibility.

03. Arguments heard and record perused.

CMs No.172-P/2021.

This application / CMs was filed for impleadment of
(i) Muhammad Ayub Khan (ii) Muhammad Javed
(iii) Izzat Khan (iv) Imtiaz (v) Hameed (vi) Pir Tahir
(vii) Ismail (viii) Hussain Shah (ix) Arif Gul (x)

Zahid Jan and (xi) Sameen Gul in the panel of

respondents. The application / CM is allowed. Office
is directed to make necessary entries in the relevant
record and in the heading of the petition as well.

04. Perusal of record reveals that the petitioner
has filed a complaint under section 200 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1898 for allegedly
committing breach of trust, extortion, cheating by
personation, fraud and blackmailing etc. against
Muhammad Ayub Khan and Muhammad _ Javed
wherein it was contended that Muhammad Javed was
the Accountant and was trusted by the petitioner and
on the basis of his trust, the petitioner used to sign
blank cheques for its future utilization, necessary
payments of ongoing projects. During the course of
day to day business in connection with ongoing
affairs of the Institute, the petitioner through
respondent No.2 met with respondent No.1 who
happened to be very humble, respectful, needy and
work loving person who could be depended for the
purpose of out sourcing the finance. In such scenario,
respondent No.1 introduced one Izzat Khan, who has
lent Rs.11.5 million and has been paid Rs.11.082
million, however, he is further demanding Rs.8
million and he is in his possession of the cheques of

the following amounts i.e. (i) 2.4 million (ii) 2.3

million (iii) 2.6 million (iv) 3 million and (v) 1.2
million with compound interest thereon such as (i)
3.5 million (ii) 3.5 million (iii) 4.2 million and (iv)
1.95 million. Record depicts that the said complaint
was filed on 30.09.2020 before the learned Judicial
Magistrate at Peshawar. It is also an admitted fact
that a complaint under section 6 of Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa Prohibition of Interest on Private
Loans Act, 2016 was filed with almost same facts,
however, in which Hameed, Tahir and Ismail were
also impleaded as respondents. Para No.14 of the
complaint filed under section 200 Cr. P.C. and the
application filed under section 6 of Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa Prohibition of Interest on Private
Loans Act, 2016 is almost the same and both were
drafted on 30.09.2020. In order to augment, the
petitioner has annexed the copy of regular civil suit
filed before Senior Civil Judge, Peshawar against
Haji Abdul Nawaz Afridi for declaration, injunction,
compensation etc., which is pending in adjudication.
Apart from above, a civil suit before District Judge,
Peshawar against Muhammad Ayub Khan, Private
Schools Regulatory Authority, Peshawar Board
under the provision of Trade Marks Act, 1940 has

also been instituted by the petitioner on 20.01.2020,

which was entrusted to learned Additional District
Judge-IX, Peshawar in which 15.02.2021 was the
last date of hearing.

05. At this juncture, admittedly, for seeking the
redressal of his grievance, he has approached to the
Court of Judicial Magistrate, Ex-Officio Justice of
Peace, to the civil Court through regular civil suit, to
the Court of learned District Judge under the
provision of Trade Marks Act, 1940, all the matters
referred to above are still pending adjudication and
none of them has been finalized. Insofar as the
contents of this petition is concerned, it appears that
there are intricacies and multifarious litigation
against added respondents and_ the private
respondents who are parties before different forums
and the questions raised in the instant petition are
intricate questions of law and facts which require
recording of pro and contra evidence, to un-earth the
truth, of course, the same could only be done before
the Court of competent jurisdiction but in no way,
the instant petition filed under Article 199 of the
Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan,
1973 could be a substitute for proposed redressal of
the petitioner. We do not deem it appropriate to

discuss the facts with respect to prayers of petitions,

suits filed by the petitioner against respective
respondents for the reasons that those are still in
process of their logical conclusion. Be that as it may,
the petitioner in para No.7 of the instant petition
contended that his complaint u/s 200 of Cr. P.C, u/s
6 of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Prohibition of Interest on
Private Loans, Act, 2016 are not sufficient to provide
the relief to the petitioner as the petitioner has been
defrauded by the private respondents, therefore,
through joint investigation team, the responsibility
could be fixed in accordance with the judgment
rendered in Writ Petition No.2173-P of 2016 dated
15.06.2016. Suffice it to say that for the infringement
of statutory rights, the petitioner is before civil court
u/s 42, 53 of the Specific Relief Act, 1877 u/s 25, 73
& 76 of Trade Marks Act, 1940 before special
court, u/s 6 of the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa
Prohibition of Interest on Private Loans, Act,
2016 and for the offences under the provision of
Pakistan Penal Code, 1860 such as breach of trust,
extortion, cheating of personation, fraud,
blackmailing, nuisance and harassment, the
petitioner has already approached to the appropriate
forum, therefore, the instant petition cannot be

entertained on the basis of the principle as laid by the

apex Court in case titled “Commissioner of Income

Tax, Companies-II_and_ another vs. Hamdard

Dawakhana (Wagf) Karachi" (PLD 1992 SC 847),

wherein it was held:
“in cases where statute provides alternate
and efficacious remedy up-to High Court,
cannot be approved or encouraged.”

06. Similarly, the Hon’ble Supreme Court in case

titled “Khalid Mehmood vs. Collector of Customs,

Customs House, Lahore” (1999 SCMR 1881), has

observed:

“As to bar of jurisdiction, it is to be noted

that Article 199 of the Constitution opens

with word to the effect that the High Court

may exercise its powers under such Article

only "if it is satisfied that no other adequate

remedy is provided by law". Adequacy of

the alternative remedy, therefore, if there is

another remedy available, should always

attract the attention of the High Court”
07. Another intriguing aspect of the instant
petition is the intricate question of law and fact
which while exercising constitutional jurisdiction
under Article 199 of the Constitution of the Islamic
Republic of Pakistan, 1973 cannot be resolved as

enunciated by the apex Court in case titled “Miss

Asma Ghafoor vs. Principal, King Edward Medical

College, Lahore and 3 others” (2011 SCMR 1131)

by observing that: -

“Moreover, there is a factual controversy
between the parties and the same cannot
be resolved without elaborate inquiry”

08. Reliance can be placed on case(s) titled

“Lugqman Sajid vs. Returning Officer and 5 others”

(2018 YLR 2319), “Mst. Robina _and_ others vs.

District Police Officer and others” (2018 YLR 665),

“Ali Nawaz Shahwani__and_brothers _ through

Proprietor __and__ another _ vs. _ Government _ of

Balochistan _through Secretary C&W Department

Quetta _and_2_ others” (PLD 2020 Quetta 21),

“Muhammad Soomar vs. Province of Sindh through

Secretary Irrigation Department, Sindh _and_7

others” (2020 YLR 1044), “Nadeem Aftab Sindhu

vs. F.O.P_through Secretary_of Law, Justice and

Parliamentary Affairs and others” (PLD 2013

Lahore 405), “4.M Construction Company (PVT)

Limited through Chief Executive Officer and another

vs.__The National Highway Authority _ through

Chairman _and_2_ others” (2015 CLD 130),

“Muhammad _Anwar_Khan_and_another vs. Khalid

Mahmood and others” (2015 MLD 1090), “Akbar

Ali vs. District Police Officer and 5 others” (2013

YLR 222).
09. The law laid down by this Court in Writ
Petition No.2173-P/2016 dated 15.06.2016 for the

purpose of constitution of joint investigation team

10

cannot be applied as the petitioner has already
approached to different forums for redressal of his
grievance, as such, no relief can be extended to the
petitioner.

10. ‘For the reasons discussed above, the instant
petition being bereft of any merit is hereby dismissed
with no order to cost.

ANNOUNCED.

17.02.2021.

SENIOR PUISNE JUDGE

JUDGE

DB Hon’ble Mr. Justice Rooh-ul-Amin Khan, SPJ
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Naeem Anwar)

Himayat, CS

