JUDGMENT SHEET
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,

BANNU BENCH
(Judicial Department)

W.P.No.232-B/2017
Sajid Khan
Versus
The State etc.
JUDGMENT
Date of hearing: 04.02.2019.

Petitioner(s) by: Mr. Noorzada Ahmadzai Advocate.
Respondent(s) by: Mr. Shahid Hameed Qureshi, Addl:

AG along with SHO Said Ayaz.

MUHAMMAD NASIR MAHFOOZ, J.- The petitioner through
instant writ petition has invoked the constitutional jurisdiction

of this Court, praying that:-

“It is, therefore, most humbly prayed that
on acceptance of this writ petition, this
Hon’ble Court may very graciously be
pleased to set aside the impugned order
of ASJ-l/Justice of Peace dated
20.02.2017 and to direct the respondents
No.1 and 2 to register an FIR of the
commission of cognizable offence about
the injuries on the person of the
petitioner and his brother and also to

direct the respondent No.3 to conduct the

Imran/* (D.B) Mr. Justice Abdul Shakoor and Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad, JJ
-2-

investigation of the case in accordance

with law to meet the ends of jsutice.”

2. Brief facts of the case are that petitioner and his
brother Bakhtaj Khan was running tea shop at New Adda
Bannu. On 13.02.2017 one Nekmat Ullah along with three
unknown persons came to their shop and demanded “Batha”
from the petitioner. On refusal Nekmat Ullah made firing at
him and his brother due to which both of them got injured and
thereafter his three companions whom he could identify on
seeing also made firing at them as a result of which Nekmat
Ullah got injured and died. Said Ayaz SHO of police station
Saddar came to the spot and took him and his brother in injured
condition along with deceased Nekmat Ullah to hospital. The
petitioner and his brother were having injuries on their persons,
the police drafted injury sheets and were escorted by one
constable to KGN hospital Bannu they were examined by a
doctor. Thereafter brother of the petitioner namely Bakhtaj was
taken by respondent No.2 from the KGN hospital to some
unknown place. The respondent No.2 with mala fide intention
registered case FIR No.87 dated 13.02.2017 under sections
302/34 PPC of police station Sadddar, wherein the petitioner
along with his two other brothers were charged for the murder
of deceased Nekmat Ullah. Petition under section 491 Cr.P.C
was filed before learned Sessions Judge, Bannu for recovery of

injured Bakhtaj, who was taken by respondent No.2 from
-3-

hospital on 13.02.2017. On 16.02.2017 the petitioner filed an
application under section 22-A(6) Cr.P.C for registration of
case to learned ASJ-II/Justice of Peace, Bannu was dismissed

vide order dated 20.02.2017, hence the instant writ petition.

3. We have heard arguments of learned counsel for

the parties and perused the record.

4. When brother of petitioner Aftabullah submitted
application on 16.02.2017 under section 491 Cr.P.C for
recovery of his brother Bakhtaj Khan the same was dismissed
on the same day by learned Sessions Judge, Bannu after bailiff
of the Court failed to find him detained in police station, Saddar
Bannu. On the same day i.e. 16.02.2017 present petitioner
submitted application under section 497 Cr.P.C for release on
bail after arrest in case FIR No.87 dated 13.02.2017 that was
dismissed on 04.3.2017 by learned Additional Sessions Judge-
II, Bannu. Even on the same date i.e. 16.02.2017 present
petitioner drafted the application under section 22-A Cr.P.C
that was submitted on 17.02.2017 alleging that he and his
brother Bakhtaj Khan were fired upon by Nekmat Ullah Khan
with the attempt to commit Qatl-e-Amd, resulting in their
injuries and some other three persons fired upon said Nekmat

Ullah Khan that resulted in his death.

5. Officer incharge of police station Saddar, Bannu
-4-

submitted his inquiry report on 19.02.2017, wherein he stated
that at the time of occurrence no other person came forward to
lodge an FIR so he lodged FIR No.87 and on 16.02.2017. Mst.
Amina Bibi, widow of deceased Nekmat Ullah in her statement
recorded under section 164 Cr.P.C , recorded before Judicial
Magistrate, charged the present petitioner and his brother for
the murder of her husband. Thus the application under section

22-A was dismissed.

6. Learned counsel for petitioner referred to judgment
reported as PLD 2018 SC 391 titled Mst. Sughran bibi vs.
State and submitted that police is legally bound to register an
FIR as per his version for the injuries sustained by him and his
brother. The arguments of learned counsel are misconceived,
however, while deriving wisdom from the said judgment his
grievance can be easily redressed after referring to various parts
of the said judgment. While interpreting section 160 Cr.P.C the

Hon’ble Supreme Court held as under:-

“This section clearly dispels the impression that
the investigating officer is to be guided or
controlled by the contents of the FIR or that the
investigation to be conducted by him is driven by
any duty to establish that the story of the incident
contained in the FIR is correct. In fact, to the
contrary, after registration of the FIR the
investigating officer is to embark upon an

exercise to discover the actuality of the matter
7.

any fresh information after the lodging of FIR may also be

-5-

irrespective of the version of the incident
narrated by the first informant through the FIR
and in the process he is expected to collect
information from any number of persons who
appear to him “to be acquainted with the
circumstances of the case”. Every new
information received by him during the
investigation of the case or every new
circumstance in which the relevant offence was
committed coming to his notice during the
investigation of the case is not to require
registration of a separate FIR because such
further information or knowledge is a part of
investigation of the same case which had taken

birth at the time of registration of the FIR.”

In another part of the same judgment it is held that

considered, relevant part is quoted below:

“This Rule should suffice to dispel any
impression that investigation of a case is to be
restricted to the version of the incident narrated
in the FIR or the allegations leveled therein. It is
quite evident from this Rule that once an FIR is
registered then the investigating officer
embarking upon investigation may not restrict
himself to the story narrated or the allegations
leveled in the FIR and he may entertain any fresh
information becoming available from any other
source regarding how the offence was committed

and by whom it was committed and he may
-6-

arrive at his own conclusions in that regard. The
final report to be submitted under Section 173,
Cr.P.C. is to be based upon his final opinion and
such opinion is not to be guided by what the first

informant had stated or alleged in the FIR.”

8. It is further held that under the Rule 25.2(3) of the
Police Rules, 1934, the investigating officer is free to entertain
any number of versions and he shall not commit himself
prematurely to any view of the facts for or against any person.
While further elucidating the ratio decidendi of case reported as
1983 SCMR 436 it was held, that the Court did not interfere in
the matter primarily because the case had already reached the
trial Court. Further elaborating the subject, Hon’ble Supreme
Court stressed that it is erroneous to assume that the police are
to investigate the case only as asserted in the FIR and then to
lead evidence in the trial Court on the accusations leveled
therein. Investigating officer is to collect every possible
information about the occurrence and submit report under
section 173 Cr.P.C not in terms of the allegation of FIR but in
accordance with the actual facts discovered during

investigation. Explaining the issue it is held as under:-

“In this paragraph of the judgment the scheme of
the law did not appear to be correctly presented
before the Court and the Court was led to
understand that investigation of a case by the

police is to be driven’ exclusively or
-7-

predominantly by the FIR originally registered
whereas the legal position, as already discussed
by us above, is to the contrary. As a matter of
fact the scheme of the law did not support the
Court’s observation that the version of the first
informant advanced through his FIR is to “non-
suit” any other version of the same incident
advanced by any other person or party to the
case. In the same vein, the reference made by the
Court to the so-called “ground realities”, a
subjective notion, could have been avoided while
interpreting legal provisions and enunciating the

”

law.

9. This possibility has been totally ruled out of
consideration in the said judgment that if a separate FIR is
registered then the accused nominated would automatically be
arrested as the law does not permit arrest of a person merely on
the basis of bald allegation levelled against him. The arrest of a
person is not to be as a matter of course and it is conditional
upon fulfillment of requisite legal requirements. Finally
concluding Hon’ble Supreme Court held as under:-

“27. As a result of the discussion made above we declare
the legal position as follows:

(i) According to Section 154, Cr.P.C. an FIR
is only the first information to the local police
about commission of a cognizable offence. For
instance, an information received from any
source that a murder has been committed in such

and such village is to be a valid and sufficient
-8-

basis for registration of an FIR in that regard.

(ii) If the information received by the local
police about commission of a cognizable offence
also contains a version as to how the relevant
offence was committed, by whom it was
committed and in which background it was
committed then that version of the incident is
only the version of the informant and nothing
more and such version is not to be unreservedly
accepted by the investigating officer as the truth

or the whole truth.

(iii) Upon registration of an FIR a criminal
“case” comes into existence and that case is to be
assigned a number and such case carries the same

number till the final decision of the matter.

(iv) During the investigation conducted after
registration of an FIR the investigating officer
may record any number of versions of the same
incident brought to his notice by different
persons which versions are to be recorded by him
under Section 161, Cr.P.C. in the same case. No
separate FIR is to be recorded for any new
version of the same incident brought to the notice
of the investigating officer during the

investigation of the case.

(v) During the investigation the investigating
officer is obliged to investigate the matter from
all possible angles while keeping in view all the
versions of the incident brought to his notice and,

as required by Rule 25.2(3) of the Police Rules,
-9-

1934 “It is the duty of an investigating officer to
find out the truth of the matter under
investigation. His object shall be to discover the
actual facts of the case and to arrest the real
offender or offenders. He shall not commit
himself prematurely to any view of the facts for

or against any person.”

(vi) Ordinarily no person is to be arrested
straightaway only because he has _ been
nominated as an accused person in an FIR or in
any other version of the incident brought to the
notice of the investigating officer by any person
until the investigating officer feels satisfied that
sufficient justification exists for his arrest and for
such justification he is to be guided by the
relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1898 and the Police Rules, 1934.
According to the relevant provisions of the said
Code and the Rules a suspect is not to be arrested
straightaway or as a matter of course and, unless
the situation on the ground so warrants, the arrest
is to be deferred till such time that sufficient
material or evidence becomes available on the
record of investigation prima facie satisfying the
investigating officer regarding correctness of the
allegations levelled against such suspect or

regarding his involvement in the crime in issue.

(vii) Upon conclusion of the investigation the
report to be submitted under Section 173, Cr.P.C
is to be based upon the actual facts discovered

during the investigation irrespective of the
-10-

version of the incident advanced by the first
informant or any other version brought to the
notice of the investigating officer by any other
person.”
10. The net result of what has been held above is that
this petition fails as the trial of the case has commenced but the
learned trial Court shall be bound to follow the same in letter
and spirit.
Announced

04.02.2019.
JUDGE

JUDGE
