Judgment Sheet

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
PESHAWAR

(Judicial Department)
WP No. 4690-P/2016
Dr. Mehfooz Hussain
Vs
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa through Secretary to Govt.
Health Department, Peshawar & others

JUDGMENT
Date of hearing. 12.04.2017
Petitioner (s) by: M/s. Shumail Ahmad Butt & A.Rahim Khan

Jadoon, advocates

Respondent (s) by: M/s Shakeel Ahmad, Advocate & Mr. Moin-
uddin Hamayun, Assistant AG.

2h OK oe OK ok

MUHAMMAD YOUNIS THAHEEM, J-.

Through this single judgment we propose to decide the
instant writ petition alongwith WP No.4765-P/2016
titled as Prof: Dr. Sadaqat Jabeen Vs Govt. of Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa & others and WP No.4777-P/2016 titled
Dr. Musa Kalim Vs Govt. of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa &
others, as all these petitions involving common question

of law and facts.

2. Brief facts of each petition are as under:

i) WP. No.4690-P/2016: The petitioner namely Dr.

Mehfooz Hussain in response to a circular dated
18.07.2016 issued by respondent No.2 inviting
applications for appointments for different positions of
Chairman of departments from entire faculty of LRH,
MTI Peshawar. The petitioner applied against the post of
Chairman of Ophthalmology Department, other
petitioners of connected petitions also applied against
their respective post for which they consider themselves
eligible and the Search Committee recommended
petitioner for the appointment as Chairman, Department
of Ophthalmology. The same recommendations of
search committee received at Dean Office on 25.10.2016
but were not accepted and were rejected by the Dean by
declaring petitioner as unsuitable, remain involved in the
activities against the MTI reforms Act and such was the
explanation for rejection of said recommendations. The
petitioner prayed for setting aside of impugned actions
and rejection of the recommendations of the Chairman
Search Committee vide the impugned letter dated
28.11.2016 issued by the Dean with prayer that it be
declared null and void, against law, illegal, without
lawful authority, caused miscarriage of justice and of no
legal effects upon the rights of petitioner and writ be

issued by directing respondents particularly Dean to
accept said recommendations of such committee and
appoint petitioner as prayed for.

ii) WP. No.4765-P/2016: The petitioner Mst. Prof.
Dr. Sadaqat Jabeen also applied for appointment as
Chairman Gynecology and Obstetrics Department in
response to same Circular as discussed above and was
recommended after completion of legal process for
selection by the Search Committee vide letter received
to the Dean on 31.10.2016 but said recommendations by
the said committee were rejected by the Dean vide
impugned letter dated 28.11.2016 on the charges that
she remain involved in strikes against MTI reforms
Acts, there were complaints against her by her junior
staffs, her opposition to the proposal of shifting of
Gynecology Department to Molvi Jee Hospital etc and
this was the explanation for rejection of the
recommendations of committee.

iii) WP No.4777-P/2016: Petitioner namely Musa
Kaleem in response to the said Circular, applied for the
appointment of Chairman of Pediatric department and
after adopting due process of selection was
recommended by the said Search Committee to the Dean
for his appointment as Chairman Pediatric Department

on 02.11.2016 but Dean in spite of acting upon the
recommendations of Search Committee rejected the
recommendations by forwarding explanation that
petitioner was unsuitable for the position of Chairman in
view of lack of scholarship with the charges of his
involvement in Anti MTI reforms activities, who became
instrumental in delaying the implementation of said
reforms with additional charges that he indulged in
litigation by challenging the MTI reforms Act before the

Court and instigated employee of HMC for strike.
3. The petitioners prayed for the relief by

declaring the acts and impugned rejection and re-
advertising of same positive impugned letter dated
28.11.2016 as null and void, explanation for rejection is
without any cogent and justifiable reasons lacking
fairness and proof, without lawful authority, seeking
relief for issuance of writ, directing the respondents to
accept the recommendations of said committee and
appoint petitioners against the posts of Chairman to the
respective departments as prayed for by the petitioners of

each petition.

4. Comments were called from respondents

No.3 & 4 in the above petitions who submitted their

comments alongwith certain documents in their support
and supported the impugned actions and explanation for
rejection of recommendations held by Search Committee

vide office letter dated 28.11.2016 by _ the

Dean/respondents.
5. Arguments heard. Record perused.
6. From the submissions made before this

Court and perusal of record, the question for
determination before this Court is as to whether the
explanations forwarded by Dean for rejection under
authority vested in him by MTI Regulation, 2015 are
valid, reasonable within the bounds of law, based on
principle of justice, justifiable, speaking and in
accordance, with circular, regulations, equity, good
conscience and law, so this Court considered the
explanation for rejection of recommendations from all
aspects thoroughly alongwith regulations, and law.
During course of arguments, learned counsel for
petitioners produced copy of recommendations of Search
Committee for the selection of Departmental Chairmen
according to which Dean of LRH, MTI, Peshawar
constituted a Search Committee comprising of Professor
Sajjad Muhammad Khan as Chairman, Professor Dr.

Mukhtiar Zaman as Medical Director, Professor Rehana
Rahim, Professor Muhammad Amjad Taqweem and
Associate Professor Mian Amjad Ali as core members
and a number of co-opted members from each
departments for the respective Chairman for interviews
according to regulations. Same document was not
objected and was not annexed with petition as per
contention of learned counsel, copies were refused and
now they became successful to obtain these copies under
access to information enactment. The said committee
after completing process of pre-interview ranking by
examining their CVs in the light of criteria circulated by
the Dean, interviewed the candidates on 18" August,
2016. The procedure governing process of appointments
of Department’s Chairman provided under Regulations
21 (ix) of Lady Reading Hospital Medical Teaching
Institute Regulations 2016 is reproduced below:

“IX) APPOINTMENT OF DEPARTMENT
CHAIRMAN.

The Dean/Principal will form a_ search
committee to recommend candidates for the
post of each Department Chairman. The
committee will consist of one faculty member
from the concerned department and four
faculty members from different departments,
ensuring that the clinical and basic science
departments are each represented by at least
one member, except in the case of the Lady

Reading Hospital, faculty members from the
Basic Science can only be included when a
Basic Medical Sciences department is affiliated
with the Hospital. The committee will also
include the Medical Director of the Hospital or
his nominee. The dean/Principal will appoint a
Chairman from amongst the members of the
committee. The search committee will invite
applications and proceed as in 4 (d) to (f) of
the Regulations. The committee will make its
recommendation to the Dean who may accept
or reject it. In the event of rejection, the Dean
will_provide_a_written explanation _for_his
action to the search committee, which will then
proceed to recommend another candidate

following the procedure mentioned above.”

(under lining is ours to emphasize)

7. So after following the relevant procedure

under above cited regulations, scrutinizing qualifications
of candidates, upon completion of selection process and
interview forwarded these recommendations to the Dean
and when said Dean received recommendations of the
Search Committee about petitioners, the
Dean/respondent No.3 himself in his letter dated
28.11.2016 in the very first paragraph has appreciated
the task of Search Committee with positive notes, “its
commitment and devotion in accomplishing the job
of recommendation in _a_ very meticulously _and
transparent manner.” So it was necessary for him as an

authority to have forwarded such believable, unbiased
explanations with proofs for rejection of
recommendations about the unsuitability of the
petitioners for the posts which are missing in the
explanations note forwarded, either appended with the
record or argued before this Court to satisfy the judicial

conscience of this Court.

8. So far as the other explanation forwarded

about the active involvement in activities against MTI
reforms Act is concerned, the filing of constitution
petitions either for challenging varies of ibid Act or for
seeking other reliefs is no good ground for rejection of
recommendations which amounted depriving eligible
candidates for appointment against positions of
concemed departments. Moreover, it was not mentioned
in the circular, Regulations that any candidate who had
invoked the constitutional jurisdiction by filing writ
petition, would be barred to apply for the concerned
posts. So explanations forwarded being subjective in
nature are based on misconceptions, misconceived
against law, circular and Regulation and are without
support of any valid proof recognized under the law, as
petitioners are neither convicted persons from any Court

of law nor their educational degrees or other testimonial
has been found fake nor has been declared by some
lawfully constituted medical board as incapacitated, so

these explanations lack fair reasoning.
9. The Dean as an authority also had to act,

decide the matter on the basis of fairness, according to
the principle of justice and law. In this respect wisdom is
derived from judgment of Honourable Supreme Court in
case Pir Imran Sajid and others Versus Managing
Director/General Manager (Manager Finance)
Telephone Industries of Pakistan and others (2015
SCMR 1257), relevant rule is reproduced as blow:

“It hardly needs to be emphasized that the
whole edifice of governance of the society
has it genesis in the Constitution and laws
aimed at to establish an order, inter alia,
ensuring the provisions of socio-economic
justice, so that the people may have
guarantee and sense of being treated in
accordance with law that they are not being
deprived of their due rights. Provision of
Article 4 embodies the concept of equality
before law and equal protection of law and
save citizens from arbitrary/discriminatory
law and actions by the Governmental
authorities. Article 5(2) commands that
every body is bound to obey the command of

the constitution 1. Every public functionary

is supposed _to function _in good faith,

honestly and _within_the precincts of its

10

power so that persons concerned should be

treated _in _accordance with _law _as

guaranteed by Article 4 of the Constitution.

It would include principles of natural

justice, procedural fairness and procedural

propriety 2. The action which is mala fide or

colourable_is not regarded _as action _in

accordance with law. While discharging

official functions, efforts should be made to

ensure that no one is prevented from
earning his livelihood because of unfair and

discriminatory act on their part.”

(under lining is ours to emphasize)

10. In view of above dicta laid down by

Honourable Apex Court and the explanations forwarded
for rejection, we are of the firm view that respondent
No.3 failed to comprehend his legal status, so, failed to
honour the collective wisdom of the committee, as a
decision of a single person without following rules of
fairness could be based on his personal bias, whims and
surmises more elaborately wherever statutes or rules or
regulations have authorized some official with some
particular authority or power to accept or reject the
collective decision of the committee, then in case of
rejection the explanation forwarded shall be coached
with fairness, unbiased reasoning, principles of justice

and law which is missing in the explanations contained
11

in impugned order dated 28.11.2016 about each
petitioner. Therefore, such explanations for rejection are
without reasonable, believable and plausible support, so
are declared contrary to law, without proof, unfair thus
has no any adverse effects upon the rights of petitioners
particularly when there is no charge over the capacity
and honesty of Search Committee rather as discussed
above it has been admired. Hence, recommendations
made by such committee are binding upon the authority
as justice is not only delivered by law Courts but is also
administered by the authority which though in no sense
to be called Court, but to have act as judges of rights of

others.

411. Thus what has been discussed above, we
allow all the three petitions, direct the respondent No.3 to
accept the recommendations of Search Committee and
appoint the petitioners on their respective posts.

Announced:
12.04.2017

JUDGE

*Ihsan* JUDGE
