IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
PESHAWAR,
[Judicial Department].

Writ Petition No.1584-P/2020

Zarak Arif Shah,
Advocate High Court,
Peshawar.
Petitioner (s)
VERSUS

The Government of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa,
through Chief Secretary Government of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa,
Civil Secretariat, Peshawar and others.

Respondent (s)
For Petitioner :- Mr. Ali Gohar Durrani, Advocate.
For Respondents :- Mr. Shumail Ahmad Butt, Advocate
General Khyber Pakhtunkhwa.
Date of hearing: 06.05.2020
JUDGMENT

ROOH-UL-AMIN KHAN, _J:- Through the instant
constitutional petition under Article 199 of the
Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973
(“the Constitution”), Zarak Arif Shah, the worthy
Advocate, Peshawar High Court Peshawar, the
petitioner, seeks issuance of the following writ:-
“That insertion of sub-section (4) in
section 22 of the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa
Control of Narcotic Substances Act, 2019
(Act No.XXXI of 2019), made through
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Control of
Narcotic Substances (Amendment)
Ordinance 2020 (Ordinance No.II of

2020), being based on malice, against the
Constitution and independence of

Judiciary, be declared as ultra vires,

therefore, be struck down.

Any other relief | deemed

appropriate in the circumstances of the

case, may also be granted in favour of the

petitioner, if not specifically asked”.
2. Petitioner is a practicing lawyer by profession.
In the writ petition he asserts that initially the control
of narcotic substances, narcotic drugs, psychotropic
substances, and control substances and the production,
procession, trafficking and transportation of such drugs
and substances and for matters ancillary thereto, were
regulated by a Federal law, namely, the Control of
Narcotics Substances Act, 1997 (“the Act of 1997”),
applicable across the country. In the year 2019, the
Government of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa enacted and
promulgated the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Control of
Narcotic Substances Act, 2019 (“Act of 2019”)
applicable to the Province of the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa
only. Through section 59 of the Act of 2019, the Act of
1997, was repealed to the extent of cultivation,
possession, selling, purchasing, delivery and
transportation etc within the Province. Section 22 of
the Act of 2019, provides for the establishment of the

Special Courts and appointment of Judges for such
Special Courts by the Government after consultation
with the Chief Justice of the Peshawar High Court. He
further asserts that the Act of 2019, having no
provision for bail was strongly objected by the
lawyers’ community of the province of Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa, as a result, certain amendements were
brought/introduced in the Act of 2019, through the
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Control of Narcotic Substances
(Amendment) Ordinance, 2020 (Ord. No.II of 2020)
(to be referred hereinafter as the Ordinance, 2020)
vide which, inter alia, under section 26, the provisions
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, were made
applicable mutatis mutandis to all proceedings under
the Act of 2019. Subsequently, The Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa Control of Narcotic Substances (Second
Amendement) Ordinance, 2020 (Ord. No.X of 2020),
was promulgated vide which sub-section (4) in section
22 regarding constitution of the Special Courts was
inserted in the Act of 2019, without consultation of
Hon’ble the Chief Justice of the Peshawar High Court,
Peshawar. He asserts that by use of word “Shall” in
section 22 of the Act of 2019, the Provincial
Government/Governor was not competent to insert
sub-section (4) in section 22 of the Act of 2019, hence,
he claims that amendment brought in section 22 of the

Act of 2019 through Ordinance, 2020, is not only
against the mandate of constitution but is an attack on
the independence of Judiciary, hence, be struck down.
3. Cr.Misc.BA No.140-P/2020, filed = by
accused/petitioner Parvaiz Hameed for his release on
bail in case FIR No.535 dated 19.10.2019, registered
under section 9 (d) of the Act of 2019, at Police Station
Topi Swabi, was also pending before this Court in
which the same legal point i.e. “Whether powers of
Hon’ble the Chief Justice of this Court can be
abridged by issuance of an Ordinance by the Governor
by inserting sub-section (4) in section 22 of the Act of
2019”, cropped up, therefore, bail petition was sent to
Hon’ble the Chief Justice for constitution of a larger
Bench or further appropriate orders vide order dated
10.02.2020. In view of the above, the bail petition was
clubbed and fixed along with the instant writ petition
before this Division Bench by Hon’ble the Chief
Justice of this Court. As the accused/petitioner was
behind the bars since 19.10.2019 and his bail petition
was pending since 4" December, 2019, therefore, due
to persistent requests of the Worthy Advocate General
for adjournments on different dates, the petitioner was
granted interim post arrest bail without touching merits
of the case vide order dated 29.04.2020.

4. In the instant writ petition, the worthy

Advocate General, was put on notice to file reply
within a fortnight vide order dated 03.03.2020,
however, despite various adjournments, the same
could not be filed, particularly, due to lack of interest
of the Provincial Government in the matter.

5. We have heard the exhaustive arguments of
learned counsel for the parties and perused and
examined the law on the subject with their valuable
assistance.

6. To cope with the legal point (supra), it would
be advantageous to refer original section 22 of the Act
of 2019, and the impugned amendments brought
through the Ordinances, 2020, which for the sake of
convenience and ready reference are reproduced
below:-

“S.22 Establishment of the Special Courts:-
(1) Government shall, by notification in the
official Gazettee, establish as many Special
Courts as it considers necessary and appoint,
after_consultation with the Chief Justice of
the Peshawar High Court, the Judges for each
of such Special Court and where it establishes
more than one Special Court, it shall specify in
the notification the place of sitting of each
Special Court and the territorial limits within
which it shall exercise jurisdiction under this
Act. (Bold and_ underlines supplied

emphasis).

Subsequently, the following amendment was brought

in section 22 of the Act of 2019, through Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa Control of Narcotic Substances
(Amendment) Ordinance, 2020 (Ord. No.II of 2020):-

“5. Amendment of section 22 of the Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa Act No.XXXI of 2019.- In the
said Act, in section 22:

(a) In sub-section (1) after the word
“establish”, and “appoint”, the words “or
designate” and “or confer” shall respectively be
inserted; and

(b) After sub-section (3) the following
new sub-section shall be added, namely;

(4) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Control of
Substances Act, 1997 (Act No.XXV of 1997),
under section 59 of this Act, “hereinafter
referred as repealed Act” the Court functioning
under the repealed Act shall continue to
entertain and dispose of matters under this Act,
till the time of necessary establishment or
designation of Special Court and conferment of

powers thereupon, under this Act”.
7. Again, through the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa
Control of Narcotic Substances (Second Amendment)
Ordinance, 2020 (Ord. No.X of 2020), inter alia other
sections of the Act of 2019, the following new sub-
sections after sub-section (3) were added;

namely:

“S.5 Amendment of section 22 of the
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Act No.XXXI of
2019:- In the said Act, in section 22, after sub-
section (3), the following new sub-sections
shall be added, namely:

(4) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Control
of Narcotic Substance Act, 1997 (Axt
No.XXV of 1997), under section 59 of this

Act, hereafter referred to as the repealed Act,
the Court, functioning under the repealed Act,
shall continue to entertain and dispose of
matters under this Act till the time of
necessary establishment or designation of
Special Court and conferment of powers
thereupon under this Act.

(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section (1) Government may, in
consultation with the Chief Justice of the
Peshawar High Court, designate and confer
the powers of a Special Court referred to :-

(a) in sub-section (2) in clause (a) on any
Sessions Judge or Additional Sessions Judge;
and

(b) In sub-section (2), in clause (b), on any
Judicial Magistrate, First Class.

Provided that any consultation of
Government or consent of the Chief Justice in
pursuance of the provisions of Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa Control of Narcotics Substances
(Amendment) Ordinance, 2020 (Ordinance
No.II of 2020) shall be deemed to be sufficient

for the purpose of this sub-section.”.

8. Section 2(ao) of the Act of 2019, defines
“Special Court”, constituted under section 22 of the
Act of 2019, as below:-

“Special Court” means the Special

Court, established under section 22 of this

Act”.
9. Under the Ordinance No.II of 2020, section 22
of the Act of 2019, was amended to the effect that in
sub-section (1) after the words “establish”, and

oe

“appoint”, the words “or designate” and “or

confer” were respectively inserted and after sub-
section (3), the newly subsection (4) reproduced above
was added. The thorough perusal of section 22 of the
Act of 2019 would reveal that appointment of the
Judges of Special Courts can only be made by the
Governor Khyber Pakhtunkhwa through an Ordinance
with consultation of Hon’ble the Chief Justice of the
Peshawar High Court. By use of word “shall” in
section 22 of the Act of 2019, “the consultation of
Hon’ble the Chief Justice” was the mandatory
requirement of the law.

10. During arguments, when the Worthy
Advocate General was confronted with the proposition
as to whether the Hon’ble Chief Justice has consulted
by the Provincial Government for “designating” or
“conferring” powers upon the Special Courts,
constituted and established under the Act of 1999, he
referred to correspondence between the Registrar of
this Court and the Deputy Secretary (Judicial) Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa Home and Tribal Affairs Department;
which for the sake of convenience and ready reference
are reproduced below. The letter addressed by the
latter to the former on 05.12.2019, read as under:-

“To

The Registrar,
Peshawar High Court,
Peshawar.
Subject: ESTABLISHMENT OF COURTS
UNDER SECTION 22 OF THE KHYBER
PAKHTUNKHWA CONTROL OF NARCOTIC
SUBSTANCES ACT 2019.

Dear Sir,

I am directed to refer to the subject cited
above and to state that section 22 of the Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa Control of Narcotic Substances Act,
2019, empowers the Government to establish as
many Special Courts as it considers necessary and
appoint, after consultation with the Chief Justice of
the Peshawar High Court, the Judges for each of
such Special Court.

Since, no Additional Special Courts have
been established under section 22 of the Act ibid
and in view of hardships to litigant public, it is
proposed that the Courts of District and Sessions
Judges, Additional District & Sessions Judges and
Courts of Judicial Magistrates First Class already
notified under section 46(5) of the Control of
Narcotic Substances Act, 1997 (now repealed) may
be conferred power of Courts respectively for the
time being.

You are, therefore, requested to kindly
place the matter before the Hon’ble Chief Justice
of the Peshawar High Court for requisite
consultation and consent for conferment of the
power of judges Special Court upon the District
and Sessions Judges/Additional District and
Sessions Judges and Judicial Magistrate, for the
purpose of trial of offences under the Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa Control of Narcotic Substances Act,
2019.

Yours faithfully,
Deputy Secretary (Judicial).

In response of the above mentioned letter, the
worthy Registrar of this Court informed the concerned
authority through letter No.24674 dated 24.12.2019,
text of which is reproduced below:-

“To

The Deputy Secretary (Judicial)
Government of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa,
Home & Tribal Affairs Department,
Peshawar.

Subject:- ESTABLISHMENT OF COURTS
UNDER SECTION 22 OF THE KHYBER
PAKHTUNKHWA CONTROL OF NARCOTICS
SUBSTANCES ACT, 2019.

“Tam directed to refer to your letter
No.SO(J)/HD/GEN/483/2019/Vol I dated
10

05.12.2019, on the subject and to say that after
due consideration, it has been observed that
appointment of judges etc could not precede the
establishment of the Special Courts on part of
the Government as required by the law. When
the establishment of the Special Courts in
accordance with law takes place, the requisite

consultation will follow for appointment of
the Judges of such Courts or conferment of
the powers, as the case may be, subject to the

permissibility by law. (The underlines
supplied for emphasis).

It is, therefore, hereby asked that the
Government shall establish the Special Courts
in accordance with law by Notification in the

Official Gazette, please.

Additional Registrar (Admn)
For Registrar.

11. After receipt of the above mentioned letter
dated 24.12.2019, the Provincial Government went
into a deep slumber and ultimately awakened through
the agitation of the lawyers’ community demonstrating
throughout the Province, as the accused involved in
narcotics cases had been left remediless. Resultantly,

the Provincial Government again addressed a letter to

ye

the worthy Registrar of this Court on 11” February,

2020, text of which is reproduced below:-

“The Provincial Government promulgated the
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Control of Narcotic
Substances (Amendement) Ordinance, 2020
on 31* January, 2020. Section 22(1) of the
ibid Ordinance empowers the Provincial
Government to “designate” Special Courts or
“confer” such powers on any existing Courts
in consultation with the Hon’ble Chief Justice
Peshawar High Court.

In order to avoid delay in trials of the
offences under the ibid Ordinance, it is
proposed that the Courts of District &
Sessions Judges, Additional District &
11

Sessions Judges and Courts of Judicial
Magistrates first class already notified under
Section 46(5) of the Control of Narcotic
Substances Act, 1997 (now repealed) may be
conferred powers of courts respectively for
the time being.

You are therefore, requested to kindly
place the matter before the Hon’ble Chief
Justice Peshawar High court for requisite
consultation and consent for conferment of
the powers of Judges Special Courts upon the
District & Sessions Judges, Additional
District & Sessions Judges and Courts of
Judicial Magistrates First Class for the
purpose of trial of offences under section
22(4) of the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Control of
Narcotic Substances (Amendment)

Ordinance, 2020.”

The above mentioned request of the Provincial
Government was replied by the worthy Registrar of
this Court vide letter dated 19.03.2020, wherein the
concemed authority was informed that by inserting the
words “Designate” or “confer” after the word
“establish” in section 22 of the Act of 2019, the
Provincial Government has encroached the powers of
the Chief Justice with regard to designation of the
Judicial Officers and conferment of powers upon them
under section 22 of the Act of 2019. In such like
matters, “consultation” with Hon’ble the Chief Justice
to designate the existing Criminal Courts of relevance
as special Courts under the KP CNS Act, 2019 was

mandatory. For better understanding, we deem it
12

appropriate to reproduce the text of the letter dated
19.03.2020 i.e. reply to letter dated 11.02.2020:-

“T am directed to refer to your office Letter No.SO
(Judl)/Home Department/P-483/2019/Vol-I dated
11.02.2020 on the subject noted above, and to say
that the matter was placed before Hon’ble the
Chief Justice in light of the request as made for
consultation and consent in the letter under
reference. Hon’ble the Chief Justice has been
pleased to approve the following consultative
view:-
“Despite addition of the isolated
word “confer” in sub section (1) of
section 22 of the Act, the
Government is still devoid of
authority to confer the powers of
Special Courts upon judges of
ordinary courts in absence of the
object for the said word or there
being no specific provision like Sub-
section (5) in CNS Act, 1997.
By providing the word “or
designate” after the word “establish”
the Government has got the power to
designate the existing courts of
Sessions Judges/Additional Sessions
Judges, and of the Judicial
Magistrates First Class as Special
Courts under the Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa Narcotic Substances
Control Act, 2019. Thus, it may seek
for consultation with Hon’ble the
Chief Justice to designate the
existing criminal courts of relevance
as the Special Courts under KP
CNSA, 2019, but again in this case
the designated courts may not be able
for all times to share the workload

generated by two different
13

enforcement agencies including the
Directorate General of Excise &
Taxations and the Police Department
as introduced and authorized for
registration of cases and
investigation under the said Act. So,
if the Government intends to run
with scheme of designated courts for
purpose of KP CNSA Act to save the
additional cost of infrastructure and
support staff of judges in case of
establishment of Special Courts, it
will have to create the additional
posts of Additional Sessions Judges
and of the Judicial Magistrate. If we
simply concur with the demand of
the Government for designation of
existing Courts as the Special Courts,
we may face the hardships to manage
the workload with existing strength
of the Judicial Officers. So, we may
appropriately enter into a short term
arrangement with the Government,
until it meets with the mandatory
requirement of establishment of
Special Courts and appointment of
its judges.

Therefore, I am further directed to ask
the Government to establish the Special Courts
and create posts of judges in the next financial
year; and to convey hereby the consent of Hon’ble
the Chief Justice for designation of the existing
relevant courts as the Special Courts under the
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Control of Narcotic
Substances Act, 2019 for a _ period till
establishment of Special Courts as_ herein
indicated, please.”

12. From the correspondence (ibid), we did not

find any consultation by the Provincial Government as
14

required under section 22 of the Act, 2019 or assent
accorded by Hon’ble the Chief Justice of this Court for
“designating” or “conferring” power upon the
Special Courts under the Act of 1999, whereas,
subsection (4) inserted through the Ordinance II of
2020, speaks volumes that power conferred upon
Hon’ble the Chief Justice of this Court was abridged
by the Governor through an Ordinance not only to
avoid the consultation of Hon’ble the Chief Justice but
also to offend the mandate of Articles 2A, 175(3) and
203 of the Constitution, which exercise is against the
independence of judiciary.

13. Under the provisions of Article 2-A of the
Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973, the
Objectives Resolution, which set the code and ethics,
has been made integral part of the Constitution and is
inseparable limb of the supreme law of the land. The
objectives Resolution provides that:-

“Wherein the independence of the judiciary
shall be fully secured.”

14. Under Article 175 (3) of the Constitution
(as originally enacted), it was provided that the
Judiciary shall be separated from the Executive
progressively within three years from the date on
which the Constitution came into force viz 14.08.1973.

The period of three years was subsequently extended to
15

five years by the Constitution (Sth Amendment) Act,
1976 and then to 14 years by the Revival of the
Constitution, 1973 Order (P.O. 14 of 1985). Thus, the
period during which the Judiciary was to have been
separated from the Executive was enlarged under
various extensions up to the 14” August, 1987,
however, neither the democratically elected
governments nor the interveners tried to attend this
important issue. In this backdrop, two Constitutional
petitions were filed before the worthy Sindh High
Court (C.Ps Nos.D-123/1974 and D-89/1987) by Mr.
Sharif Fardi and some other members of the Pakistan
Bar Council complaining of this defiance and seeking
issuance of appropriate directions against the
Governments concerned obliging them to implement
the mandate of the Constitution. This was the case of
first expression on the point of independence of
judiciary, therefore, both the petitions were fixed
before the Full Bench of the worthy Karachi High
Court which arrived at a conclusion (by a majority of
five to one) that the Constitutional obligations
contained in Article 175 (3) had indeed been
disregarded and that appropriate directions could
competently be issued by the High Court under Article
199 directing the authorities to fulfill them.

Accordingly, the petitions were accepted vide
16

authoritative judgment dated 24.04.1989, reported as,

“Sharif Faridi and 03 others Vs the Federation of

Pakistan” (PLD 1989 Karachi 404), relevant parts of
which are reproduced below:-

“Supervision and control over the subordinate
judiciary vested in the High Court under
Art.203, keeping in view Art. 175, is
exclusive in nature, comprehensive in extent
and effective in operation and comprehends
the administrative power as to the working of
the subordinate Courts and disciplinary
jurisdiction over the subordinate judicial
Officers. Any provision in an Act or any rule
or a notification empowering any executive
functionary _to have administrative
supervision and control over the subordinate
judiciary will be violative of Art. 203 of the
Constitution and will militate against the
concept of separation and independence of
judiciary as envisaged by Art.175 of the
Constitution and the Objectives Resolution”.

“In a set-up where the Constitution is based
on trichotomy of power, Judiciary enjoys a
unique and supreme position within the
framework of the Constitution as it creates
balance amongst various organs of the State

and also checks the excessive and arbitrary
17

exercise of power by the Executive and the

Legislature, Judiciary has been termed as a

watch-dog and sentinel of the rights of the

people and the custodian of the Constitution.

It has been described as “the safety valve” or

“the balance wheel” of the constitution. The

jurisdiction and the parameters for exercise of

power by all the three organs have been

mentioned in definite terms in_ the

Constitution. No organ is permitted to

encroach upon the authority of the other and

the Judiciary by its power to interpret the

Constitution keeps the Legislature and

Executive within the spheres and bounds of

the Constitution.”
The judgment (supra) was assailed by the Government
of Sindh through Chief Secretary to the Government of
Sindh, Karachi and others by filing Civil Appeals
Nos.105-K_ to 107-K of 1989, before the Hon’ble
Supreme Court. As all the Provincial Governments,
represented by their respective Chief Secretaries,
willingly agreed to the separation of judiciary from the
executive and giving it full independence, hence, the

appeals were dismissed vide judgment rendered in case

titled, “Government of Sindh through Chief

Secretary to Government of Sindh Karachi and
18

others Vs Sharaf Faridi_ and others (PLD 1994 SC

105),

In Al Jehad Trust’s case (PLD 1996
Supreme Court 324), appointments of Judges in the
Superior Judiciary were challenged on the ground that
they have been made in contravention of the procedure
and guidelines laid down in the Constitution and in this
context the august Supreme Court while examining in
detail the relevant Articles of the Constitution
pertaining to the Judiciary specified in Part-VII of the
Constitution and meaning of “consultation”, rendered
an authoritative judgment in the case (supra), relevant
parts relating to the controversy are reproduced below:-

“The words “after consultation” employed
inter alia in Articles 177 and 193 of the
Constitution connote that the consultation
should be effective, meaningful, purposive,
consensus oriented, leaving no room for
complaint of arbitrariness or unfair play.”.....

“In the Constitution of 1973, by
which Pakistan is being governed, in the
Chapter relating to the Judiciary and in the
process of appointments, the word
“consultation” is used.

The meaning of the word
“consultation” is very pivotal in nature
because the independence of the judiciary
and the appointments of the Judges have
close nexus with it or in other words deep-

rooted in it.
19

The word “consultation” used in the
Constitutional provisions relating to the
Judiciary is to be interpreted in the light of
the exalted position of the Judiciary as
envisaged in Islam and also in the light of the
several provisions of the Constitution which
relate to the Judiciary guaranteeing its
independence.

The Legislature has to legislate, the
Executive has to execute laws and _ the
Judiciary has to interpret the Constitution and
laws. The Success of the system of
governance can be guaranteed and achieved
only with these pillars of the State exercise
their powers and authority within their limits
without transgressing into the field of the
others by acting in the spirit of harmony,
cooperation and coordination.

Appointment of a Judge and the
mode and manner in which he is
appointed has close nexus with the
independence of Judiciary and cannot be
separated from each other. The word
“consultation” used in the Constitutional
provisions relating to the Judiciary is to be
interpreted in the light of the exalted
position of the Judiciary as envisaged in
Islam and also in the light of the several
provisions in the Constitution which relate
to the Judiciary guaranteeing its
independence”.

“Word “consultation” has to be
interpreted in the light of the objectives
Resolution, which is integral part of the

constitution providing in unequivocal

terms that the independence of the
20

Judiciary shall be fully secured.”
(emphasis supplied).

The aforesaid view was reiterated by Hon’ble Supreme

Court in case titled “Zafar Ali Shah Vs Pervez

Musharraf, Chief Executive of Pakistan (PLD 2000
SC 869), wherein it was held that:-

“The independence of judiciary is a basic
principle of the constitutional system of
governance in Pakistan. The Constitution of
Pakistan contains specific and categorical
provisions for the independence of judiciary.
The Preamble and Article 2A state that “the
independence of judiciary shall be fully
secured” and with a view to achieve this
objective, Article 175 provides that “the
Judiciary shall be separated progressively

from the executive”.
In case titled, “Shahzia Munawar vs Punjab Public
Service Commission through Secretary Lahore”
(PLD 2010 Lahore 160) in the matter of appointment
of Civil Judge-cum-Judicial Magistrate, the Hon’ble
Lahore High Court while following the ratio of Sharaf
Faridi case (PLD 1994 SC 105), observed that:-

“Though we have already held that the appellants
were eligible for appointment as Civil Judges-cum-
Judicial Magistrates, we are constrained to examine
this aspect of the matter. The Constitution of Islamic
Republic of Pakistan, 1973, proceeds on the premises
of Trichotomy of powers with the independence of
Judiciary and its separation from the Executive as

one of its salient features. No statute or Rule or
21

Regulation made thereunder can be interpreted so as
to offend against the aforesaid principle of
independence of Judiciary lest its every validity and
constitutionality become doubtful. In mattes relating
to selection, appointments and promotion of
members of the Judicial service this independence
needs to be guarded even more a jealously. In this
behalf the observation of the Honourable Supreme
Court in the case reported as Abdul Matin Khan and
02 others vs NWFP through Chief Secretary and 02
others (PLD 1993 SC 187) is of great relevance and
is reproduced as follow:-

“Although a case is pending before us from
Sindh High Court on question of separation
of Judiciary and another regarding
independence of judiciary, vis a vis the
transfer of High Court judges to the Federal
Shariat Court, this case presents a third
feature regarding both the independence and
separation of judiciary. If power of the
Government and its functionaries to override
the assessment, opinion and directions of the
High Court with regard to its own
subordinate judiciary in matter of their
promotion is upheld, the very fabric of
independence and separation of judiciary is
considerably damaged. It is not necessary to
spell out the detailed consequences in the
context of our Constitutional set up. It would
suffice to say that besides the contravention
of some of the commands in the specific
constitutional provisions including Article
175 thereof but also that contained in the
Objectives Resolution which inter alia
provides that the independence of judiciary
shall be fully secured, would be flouted.”
The aforesaid observations leave no room for doubt

that matter pertaining to members of the judicial
service and their selection, appointments and
promotions the view and opinions of this Court must
take precedence over any purported opinion of the
Executive. It is in the above perspective that Rule 12
reproduced above must necessarily be interpreted. In
the instant case not only specific observations were
made by this Court on the judicial side but a
reference was made by the Chief Justice and the
other Judges forming part of the Administration
Committee of this Court. The competent authority

should have given defence to such observations
22

rather than override the same, specially as this court

was the appointing authority of the appellants”.

In case titled, “Agha Inam ur Rehman Khan vs the
Registrar Lahore High Court Lahore” (2013 SCMR
109), the legal point involved was that appellant was a
Civil Judge and was dismissed from service by the
competent authority i.e. the Chief Justice and Judges.
The appellant made departmental representation before
Hon’ble the Chief Justice Lahore High Court, Lahore,
which was returned to him being incompetent. On
return, the appellant, preferred appeal before the
Governor Punjab, followed by appeal before Punjab
Subordinate Judiciary Service Tribunal, which
ultimately befell before the Hon’ble Supreme Court of
Pakistan, wherein it was elaborated under the
constitutional guarantees of independence of judiciary
that Governor is not an authority to hear appeal against
the order of the Chief Justice of High Court. The
relevant paragraph from the above cited judgment is
reproduced below:-

“We are afraid that the contention propounded
by the learned counsel for the appellant is
conceptually flawed, unfounded and
misconceived. The remedy of representation
under section 21(2) of the Act 1974, is only
available before the “authority next above the
authority which made the order”. The governor
of a province who in terms of Article 105 of the

Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan
23

1973, has to act on the advice of the Chief
Minister as has been explained in the case
reported as Rana Aamer Raza Ashfaq and
another Vs Dr. Minhaj Ahamd Khan and
another (2012 SCMR 6) that the Governor of a
Province, by no stretch of constitutional
scheme or on the interpretation of any
provisions of the Constitution or the law on the
subject can be held to be an authority next
above the Chief Justice and the Judges of the
High Cout, who in this case were pleased for
the dismissal order of the appellant dated
09.03.2000. Rather, shall be ludicrous
unfounded and misconceived to hold so,
especially for the reasons that according to
Article 192 of the Constitution of Islamic
Republic of Pakistan, 1973, which reads as
“Constitution of High Court:- A High court
shall consist of a Chief Justice and so many
other Judges as may be determined by law or
until so determined as may be fixed by the
President”. Therefore, the honourable Chief
Justice and the Judges of the High Court put
together is the High Court, thus neither on the
touchstone of the constitutional scheme etc nor
on the established rule of independence of
judiciary, the Governor can be said to be an
authority next above the High Court for any

purpose whatsoever”.

The hon’ble apex Court in case titled, Munir Hussain
Bhatti Vs Federation of Pakistan (PLD 2011 SC
407), has held as under:-
“It is an undisputed trend of our
Constitutional System that in matter of
appointment, security of tenure and

removal of judges the independence of
24

judiciary should remain fully
secured”......
“The supervision and control over the

judiciary vested in the High Court under

Article 203 of Constitution, keeping in

view Article 175, is exclusive in nature

and any notification empowering any

executive functionary to have control over

the subordinate judiciary will be violation

of the above Article 203 of the

Constitution. Besides it would militate

against the concept of operation of powers

and independence of judiciary.”
15. = Deriving wisdom from the above referred
judgments, it can be safely held that the matters of
appointment, promotion, posting, transfer and
conferment of powers including the terms and
conditions of service of members of the Subordinate
Judiciary, shall be controlled and governed by a High
Court of the Province and any legislative enactment in
the garb of power of promulgating an Ordinance, for
grabbing the constitutionally assigned mandate of the
Judiciary, will not only be violative of Articles 175(3)
and 203 of the Constitution, but also offending against
the constitutional scheme of independence of the

Judiciary, enumerated in Article 175 of the

Constitution and the Objectives Resolution. The
25

inappropriate and unwarranted interference with the
powers vested in the Chief Justice and the High Court,
by any Executive Authority, will create an imbalance
in the constitutionally empowered Organs of the State
which must result into a state of great confusion and
turmoil. The division of functions of the three main
Organs of the State is recognized and emphasized by
the Constitution. Judicial powers are vested in the
judiciary in terms of Article 2 and 203 of the
Constitution. Similarly, the Executive and_ the
Legislature are vested with powers in their respective
spheres. It is neither the intention of the Legislature
nor the scheme of the Constitution that the powers of
judiciary may be bypassed or be shared by the
Executive or Legislature or that the powers vested in
the Executive or the Legislature be exercised by the
Judiciary. Each organ of the State, under the
trichotomy of powers, distributed by the Constitution,
shall remain restricted in its sphere.

Needless to mention that, the Legislature is
vested with the power to legislate, but they are
presumed not to legislate contrary to the rule of law
and main scheme of Constitution. The Legislative
competence of the Governor or to promulgate an
Ordinance by him is not disputed. The controversy

raised in the petition is that the Governor by
26

exercising his power vested in him under Article 128
of the Constitution, shall adhere to his sphere
envisaged by the Constitution in the scheme of
trichotomy of powers and shall not legislate contrary
to Constitution. As observed in the earlier part of the
judgment, the strike of the lawyers’ fraternity in the
Province, was a circumstance which render it
necessary for the Governor to exercise his powers
under Article 128 of the Constitution by taking
immediate action for promulgation of the Ordinance
under challenge, whereby the provision of bail was
provided by introducing amendment in the KP CNS
Act, 2019, with an addition in section 22 whereby
after words “establish” and “appoint”, the words
“or designate” and “or confer”, were respectively
inserted. Similarly, by insertion of subsection 4 in
section 5 of the Act of 2019, section 46 of the repealed
Act of 1997, was resuscitated and the consultation and
consent of the Chief Justice of Peshawar High Court,
made under the Act of 1997, were held sufficient for
the purpose of the Act of 2019. Though the Federal
Act (CNSA) 1997 was partially repealed by the
provincial (CNSA) 2019, but to the extent to
cultivation, possession, selling, purchasing, delivery
and transportation etc. to the extent of Khyber

Pakhtunkhwa, whereas the provisions of section 45 of
27

and 46 of Act 1997 with regard to jurisdiction and
establishment of Special Courts was not expressly
repealed, however, by insertion of a particular section
i.e. 22 in the Act 2019 the utility and existence and
applicability of sections 45 and 46 of the Act 1997
completely obliterated from the statute to the extent of
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province. Sections 46 (4) and
(5) of the partially repealed act 1997 provided for
consultation of the Chief Justice of the province for
appointment and establishment of the Special Courts.
Likewise section 22 also provides for consultation of
the Chief Justice of the Peshawar High Court in
relation to establishment of the Special Court. It is
settled principle of law that the later statute repeals the
earlier statute. By insertion of section 22 in the Act
2019 i.e. specific provision for establishment of court
in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, section 45 and 46 of the
partially repealed Act 1997 has lost its efficacy and
applicability in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and as such shall
be deemed as impliedly repealed, hence the
consultation with the Chief Justice under the repealed
act cannot be dragged to the newly enacted law for
carrying out the requirement of section 22 of the Act
2019. Had it been an amendment in Act 1997, the
consultation of the Chief Justice would have been

sufficient for establishment of new courts, but in case
28

of repeal of the Act 1997 and promulgation of Act
2019 with a particular provision of consultation of the
Chief Justice for establishment of Courts would be
sine qua non under the new dispensation. The repeal
of law is differ from amendment, because the
amendment of a law involves making a change in a
law that already exist, leaving a portion of the original
still standing, whereas a repeal is an amendment or
abrogation of previously existing statute expressly or
impliedly. On the cost of repetition we must reiterate
that the provisions of section 46 of the Act 1997 have
impliedly repealed by section 22 of the Act 2019.
From the detail analysis of the case law, rendered by
the august Supreme Court as well as the High Courts
of the Country, while interpreting the supervisory and
administrative powers of the High Court, it is manifest
that conferment of powers and designating a court/
Judge of subordinate Judiciary is the sole prerogative
and powers of High Court. All the matters pertaining
to member of the judicial services viz their selection,
appointment, promotion, posting, transfer and
disciplinary proceedings, come under the power of the
High Court, whereas, any amendment abridging
powers of the Chief Justice and High Court and
empowering the Executive Authority to confer power

on a Judicial Officer or designate a Court, without
29

consultation of the Chief Justice, not only amount to
intrusion and encroachment on the powers vested in
the Chief Justice and the High Court, but also
violative of Article 2-A, 175(3) and 203 of the
Constitution. The provisions inserted through
amendment in section 22 of the Act of 2019, being
against the principles of trichotomy of power, as
envisaged in the Constitution and most particularly the
law settled down on the independency of judiciary, is
not sustainable being ultra vires of the Constitution
and transgression of powers. No doubt, in such like
matters, deviation from the Constitution shall create
harmful disharmony in three pillars of the State. We
are conscious of the facts that only the Legislature
have the powers to make laws, but it must be subject
to constitutional limitations, without encroaching upon
the independence of judiciary and keeping in view the
principles of supremacy of rule of law and spheres of
power, because improper exercise of power by the
executive may gravely imperil the independence of
judiciary which, of course, is one of the foremost
concern of constitution. There is no cavil to the
proposition that mala fide may not be attributed to the
Legislature, however, we have noted with great
concern that the amendement under challenge,

whereby the power of delegating conferment and
30

designating upon the District courts are vested in the
High Court under Article 203 of the Constitution were
over sighted rather militated through a poorly drafted
amendment in section 22 by inserting sub-section 4 &
5 therein and that too, after clarification of situation by
the Registrar of the High Court through letter dated
19.03.2020. Though, through the amendment
ordinance, after sub section 3 new subsections 4 and 5
with a proviso were added to section 22 of the Act
2019 but the main section i.e. 22 was neither omitted
nor modified. By the use of word “shall” in the section
(ibid) the consultation of the Chief Justice is still the
mandatory requirement while bringing back one of the
provisions of repealed Act of 1997, about consultation
of Chief Justice, shall amount only to an unexpected
mischief and to gravely imperil the independence of
judiciary. We deem it necessary to mention here that
the consultation with Chief Justice and ascent of his
lordship qua conferment and designation of power on
District Judiciary is not only the requirement of Act,
2019, but also mandatory under Article 203 of the
Constitution. Not only under the Narcotic Laws, but
on establishment of any court by the
Federal/Provincial Government, the concerned
Government while require the services of members of

District Judiciary, shall consult the Chief Justice of the
31

respective High Courts for providing the services of
judicial officer. The judicial service whether at the
level of district courts or Courts subordinate thereto is
under the control of the High Court in all respects. The
members of District judiciary are recruited amongst
the members of the bar and by promotion from
amongst the senior civil judges on the basis of
seniority-cum-fitness by the Administrative
Committee of the High Court. In such a way the
service of District Judicial officer is distinct and
separate from civil and executive service of the
province. The transfer and posting of members of
judicial service fall under the domain of High Courts
while the executive authority has no nexus with the
conferment of power upon the judicial officer. The
draft man of the Ordinance was either unaware about
the above discussed judicial hierarchy or was avoiding
the process of consultation of Chief Justice to wriggle
out from the contents of last reply to the Government
by the Registrar of this Court. In both the situations
the respectable Governor of the province was misled
and deluded. It is necessary to emphasize here that the
legislative drafter is under a laden duty to ensure that
the contents of the legislative draft are not inconsistent
or ultra virus with the provisions of the Constitution

and the proposed enactment is within the competence
32

of legislative Authority. Such a drafter must be well
conversant with the legislative list of the Constitution,
the Federal and the Provincial Codes, which contains
all Federal and Provincial laws. At least, the drafter
should know about the provisions of the General
Clauses Act, which is commonly known as
Interpretation Act. The words, sentences and language
of the provisions of the under challenge Ordinance
will make it abundantly clear that its drafter was either
alien to Articles 2-A, 175(3) and 203 of the
Constitution or he has deliberately deviated from the
Constitution or over sighted the importance of
independence of Judiciary. Likewise, the
Promulgating Authority has also signed the Ordinance
without adhering to its contents. Without dilating upon
the competency of the drafter of the impugned
Ordinance and its promulgation by the Provincial
Government, it would be expedient to refer to the
book “Jinnah: Creator of Pakistan” authored by Hector
Bolitho, wherein about perspective on legislative
drafting of Quaid-e-Azam Muhammad Ali Jinnah, he
says: -

“When Bills arrived for him to sign,
the Quaid-e-Azam, would go through
them sentence by sentence. Clumsy
and badly worded, “he would

complain. He would tell his Secretary,
33

“Split it up into more clauses!” “This
should go back and be rewritten!”
When the Secretary pleaded, “Sir, you
will be holding up a useful piece of
legislation, “he would relent. But his
vigilance did not weaken. “They
cannot hustle me,” he would say, “I

won’t do it”.
16. The matter relating to the posting and
conferring powers upon the members of District
Judiciary have elaborately been discussed by the
Hon’ble Lahore High Court, Lahore in case titled,
“Shazia Munawar vs Punjab Public Service
Commission through Secretary, Lahore” (PLD

2010 Lahore 160) wherein placing reliance on Mian

Khan’s case (PLD 1993 SC 187), it was ruled that:

“Constitution of Pakistan 1973, proceeds on
the premises of trichotomy of powers with
independence of judiciary and its separation
from executive as one of its salient features.
No statute or regulation made under the
constitution can be interpreted so as to
offend against the principle of
Independence of Judiciary lest its very
validity and constitutionality become
doubtful. In matters relating to selection,
appointment and promotion of members of
judicial service the Independence needs to
be guarded even more jealously.”

Same view has been followed by the worthy Lahore

High Court in case titled, “Government of Punjab
through Chief Secretary, vs Syed Riaz Alizaidi”

34

(2016 PLC (CS) 1074).

Court, this Court in case titled, Yousaf Ayub Khan vs

Government through Chief Secretary, Peshawar

and 02 others” (PLD 2016 Peshawar 57), observed

Following the view of the Hon’ble Supreme

as under:-

“In the Al-Jehand Trust’s case PLD 1996 SC
324, 429, although the august Supreme Court
stated with reference to the appointment of
Judges of Superior Judiciary but the principle
applies with equal force to all judicial
appointment including those of in the District
Judiciary. The dictum laid down in Al-Jehand
case was soon reaffirmed by Supreme Court in
case of Mehram Ali and others V Federation of
Pakistan PLD 1998 SC 1445-1474 and Sheikh
Liaqat Hussain Vs Federation of Pakistan PLD
1999 SC 504, 658. This dicum has also been
reiterated in Sindh High Court Bar Association
Vs Federation of Pakistan PLD 2010 SC 879,
1182, Munir Hussain Bhatti Vs Federation of
Pakistan PLD 2011 SC 407.

In the case of Mehram Ali and others
Vs Federation of Pakistan and others (PLD
1998 SC 1445 the august Supreme Court after
consideration the relevant constitutional
provisions and precedents laid down guiding
principles, some of these are as follows:-
That Articles 175 and 202 and 203 of the
Constitution provide a frame work of judiciary
i.e. Supreme Court, a High Court for each
province and such other Courts as may be
established by law.
That the word “such other courts as may be

established by law” employed in clause (1) of
35

Article 175 of the Constitution are relatable to
the subordinate courts referred to in Article 203
thereof.

iii. That in view of Article 203 of the Constitution
read with Article 175 thereof the supervision
and control over the subordinate judiciary vests
in High Court, which is exclusive in nature,
comprehensive in extent and effective in
operation.

iv. Any court which is not under the administrative
control of High Court and/or the Supreme
Court does not fit in within the judicial frame

work of the constitution.

Vv. That independence of judiciary is inextricably
linked and connected with the process of
appointment of judges and the security of their

tenure and other terms and conditions.

17. In view of the above discourse and deriving
wisdom and guidance from the judgments of the
Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan, we have no
hesitation to hold that insertion of section 5 of KP
Control of Narcotic Substances (Amendment)
Ordinance 2020 (Ordinance No.II of 2020), being
inconsistent and ultra virus to Articles 2-A, 175 (3) and
203 of the Constitution, is not sustainable. Similarly,
sections 5(4) and (5) of the Ordinance (ibid), being an
encroachment upon the powers of the Chief Justice of
High Court and intrusion on the independence of
judiciary is also against the judgments of the august
Supreme Court of Pakistan which, under Article 189 of

the Constitution, 1973 are binding upon all organs of
36

the State, therefore, on this score too is not sustainable
and liable to be set-aside. Simultaneously the power
conferred upon the Sessions Judges, Additional
Sessions Judge, and Judicial Magistrate 1‘ Class, as
Special Court under the amendment ordinance 2019,
being, without consultation and consent of the Chief
Justice, Peshawar High Court is in violation of section
22 of the Act 2019 and Article 2A, 175(3) and 203 of
the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973,
as such, held an act void-ab-initio and holder of the
post by above said judges as
special court, will be treated as having exercised
powers and functions in a defective capacity.

18. During the course of arguments, the Advocate
General stated at the bar that the Ordinance under
challenge has died its own death i.e. on expiration of
its statutory period and that subsequently, vide
Notification No. SO (Judl)/HD/Gen/P-483/2019/Vol.
dated 22.04.2020, Hon’ble the Chief Justice was
pleased to accord his assent in pursuance of the
required consultation by the Provincial Government for
designating of the Courts of Sessions Judges,
Additional Sessions Judges and Judicial Magistrate 1*
Class, as Special Courts under the Act of 2019.

19. From the above referred to notification dated

22.04.2020, it divulges that the Provincial Government
37

has realized its mistake committed in the Ordinance
No.II of 2020, however, has repeated the same mistake
in the subsequent Ordinance promulgated for extension
of further time of the impugned ordinance. It was also
brought into our notice that the Ordinance has not yet
been placed before the Provincial Assembly for further
proceedings, as required under Article 128 of the
Constitution. It is expected that the Provincial
Government while presenting it before the Provincial
Assembly, shall omit and delete the amended sub
sections 4 & 5 in section 22 of the Act 2019, through
Ordinance No.II of 2020 from its text as the same, after
consulting the Hon’ble the Chief Justice and accord of
his ascent have became redundant.

20. Since the power conferred upon the Sessions
Judges, Additional Sessions and Judicial Magistrate 1*
Class as special judges in pursuance of the amended
section 22 by insertion of subsection 4 and sub section
5 has been declared void ab initio and in violation of
the Constitution 1973 and the act done and order or
judgment passed by the Special Courts, including all
the proceedings, have been treated as having done in
defective capacity. However, after rectification of the
mistake by the Government through getting
notification dated 22.4.2020 i.e consulting the Chief

Justice as required under section 22 of the Act 2019,
38

all the acts done and order and judgment passed by the
above mentioned judges, including all the proceedings
under the Act 2019, shall remain protected under the
defective doctrine. Reference in this regard may be
made to Mehram Ali’s case (PLD 1998 SC 1445)
and Malik Asad’s case (PLD1998 SC 161).

21. The plea of bail of petitioner in connected
Cr.Misc.BA No.140-P/2020 has already been accepted
and has been granted interim post arrest bail which
order is confirmed on existing bonds.

22. This petition is disposed of accordingly.

23. Copy of this judgment shall be provided to the
worthy Governor through Secretary Law Parliamentary
Affairs and Human Rights Department, Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa Peshawar for kind perusal of Para-15 of
the judgment for guidance and future legislation under
Article 128 of the Constitution, 1973.

Announced:

06.05.2020

M.Siraj Afridi PS

JUDGE

JUDGE

DB of Hon’ble Mr. Justice Rooh ul Amin Khan; and
Hon’ble Mr, Justice _Ishtiaq Ibrahim.

