IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
PESHAWAR
(Judicial Department)

Cr.R. No.83-P/2015

Date of hearing:

Petitioner (s) :

Respondent (s) :

JUDGMENT

ASSADULLAH KHAN CHAMMKANTI, J.- Through

the instant revision petition, petitioner/accused Zeeshan

has questioned the legality and propriety of judgment/order

dated 03.06.2015, rendered by learned Trial Court/

Additional Sessions Judge-II, Charsadda, whereby he

while allowing the application of the

respondent/complainant under section 540 Cr.P.C.,

summoned Mst. Reema as a witness.

2. The petitioner is under trial accused before
the learned Additional Sessions Judge-II, Charsadda, in
case FIR No.246 dated 19.10.2013, registered under
sections 324/34 PPC, in Police Station Khanmai
Charsadda, wherein he alongwith co-accused Jan Zada and

Wakil, is charged for attempting at the life of complainant

Manzoor Rehman, by firing at him on 19.10.2013 at 09.00
hours, on a metalled road of village Ganjiano Kala. A
dispute over women folk has been alleged as motive
behind the incident.

3. The main thrust of the arguments of learned
counsel for the petitioner was that neither Mst. Reema
figure as an eyewitness in the FIR nor has she been cited as
a witness in the calendar of the witnesses, therefore, the
learned Trial Court landed in the field of error by calling
her as a witness on the application of the
respondent/complainant, as her examination is for no other
purpose but just to fill up the lacuna in the prosecution
case.

4. Learned counsel for the respondent and
learned AAG while supporting the impugned order
contended that it is the discretion of the Trial Court to
summon any person as a witness whose evidence is
essential for just decision of the case, which discretion has
been exercised by the learned Trial Court judiciously, to
which no exception can be taken. They sought dismissal of
the revision petition.

5. Arguments heard and record perused.

6. Before dilating upon the discretion of the

Trial Court under section 540 Cr.P.C., I would like to refer

first to $.365-F Cr.P.C, particularly, its subsection (2),
which is very much relevant keeping in view the nature of
the controversy with which this Court is confronted.
“S.265-F Evidence for prosecution:- (1) If
the accused does not plead guilty or the Court
in its discretion does not convict him on his
plea, the Court shall proceed to hear the
complainant (if any) and take all such
evidence as may be produced in support of the
prosecution.

Provided that the Court shall not be
bound to hear any person as complainant in
any case in which the complaint has been
made by a Court.

(2) The Court shall ascertain from the
public prosecutor or as the case may be,
from the complainant, the names of any
persons likely to be acquainted with the
facts of the case and to be able to give
evidence for the prosecution, and shall
summon such persons to give evidence

before it.

(7) If the accused or any one or several

accused, after entering on his defence, applies

to the Court to issue any process for

compelling the attendance of any witness for

examination or the production of any

document or other thing, the Court shall issue

such process unless it considers that the

application is made for the purpose of

vexation or delay or defeating the ends of

justice such ground shall be recorded by the

Court in writing”.
S.265-F Cr.P.C. referred to above is quite comprehensive.
This section has been added in the Code notwithstanding
the already existing $.540 Cr.P.C. in order to ensure the
concept of a fair trial and in order to achieve this purpose,
equal opportunity has been provided to both, the accused
as well as the prosecution for summoning the evidence.
Subsection (7) of S.265-F Cr.P.C. grants even a right to
accused to apply for summoning any witness and
production of documents; therefore, balance has to be
struck between the parties. Section 265-F Cr.P.C. caters for
such situation where the Court may ascertain from the
complainant the name of any person likely to be

acquainted with the facts of the case and to be able to give

evidence for prosecution. This section does not provide
specifically that only those witnesses can be examined
whose statements have been recorded under section 161
Cr.P.C. or their names have been mentioned in the challan
in column of witnesses. The intent of the legislature is very
much clear from the language of the entire section that the
Court can examine any person who is acquainted with the
facts of the case, therefore, the Court is not bound to
record the statements of only those witnesses who are
listed in the calendar of witnesses only, but in order to
arrive at a just conclusion, the Court can call any person
likely to be acquainted with the facts of the case after
ascertaining it from the public prosecutor or the
complainant subject to the general provisions that
summoning of any such witness does not cause delay or
defeat the ends of justice. It would be the second option of
the Court as to what extent it consider or rely on the
statement of such witness.

7. Similarly, under section 540 Cr.P.C. the
Court can summon a material witness even if his/her name
does not appear in the column of witnesses of the challan,
provided his/her evidence is deemed essential by the Trial
Court for the right decision of the case. Powers under

section 540 Cr.P.C. to be exercised by the Court, are

divided into two parts. The first part is discretionary in
nature, whereas the second is mandatory. According to the
first part, it is discretionary with the Court to summon any
person as a witness suo motu or on an application, whereas
according to the second part, powers to summon, examine,
recall or re-examine any person as a witness, are to be
exercised with due dare and great caution. There should be
some convincing evidence/ material available on record
from which it is to be inferred that the examination of a
particular person as a witness is essential for the just
decision of the case. Power under section 540 Cr.P.C. can
be exercised if the Trial Court feels that the evidence of
such a person is essential for the just decision of the case.

8. Taking the case in hand at the touch stone of
the provisions of S.265-F and 540 Cr.P.C. discussed
above, a dispute over women folk has been alleged as
motive behind the incident. Mst. Reema who has been
summoned as a witness on the application of the
complainant is the wife of the complainant and sister of
accused/petitioner Zeeshan. No doubt, her name does not
figure in column of witnesses in the challan, but keeping in
view the peculiar facts and circumstances particularly the
motive part of the incident, she seems to be a material

witness, therefore, the learned lower Court was quite

justified to summon her as a witness on the application of
the complainant. Her examination would not prejudice the
defence as equal opportunity of cross-examination would
be provided to the defence. The impugned judgment/ order
being well reasoned and based on law on the subject is not
open to any interference by this Court in its revisional
jurisdiction.

9. Resultantly, this petition being meritless
stands dismissed. Office is directed to send the record to

the learned Trial Court within two days, without fail.

Announced
16.02.2016

JUDGE

