Nawab

JUDGMENT SHEET

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
MINGORA BENCH (DAR-UL-QAZA), SWAT
(Judicial Department)

Cr.M.BA. No. 546-M/2016
JUDGMENT
Date of hearing: 24.02.2017.

Petitioner:- (Raweed Shah) by M/S Muhammad
Razig & Aziz Muhammad, Advocates.

Respondents:- (the State & 1 another) by
Barrister Asad Hameed-ur-Rahman, State
counsel and Sahibzada Riaz-ul-Haq, Advocate.

MOHAMMAD IBRAHIM KHAN, J.- When on

18.8.2016 at the relevant time at 08:30 to 09:00
A.M Naib Subedar Bakhti Rahman Post
Commander Wazir Abad _ received the
information about commission of the
occurrence pertaining the woman being
murdered. He rushed to the house of Javaid-ur
Rahman where in a room on a double bed he
found the corpus of the woman. She was later
identified as Mst. Naheed wife of Javaid-ur
Rahman. By that time children were locked in
another room. It was found that the said Mst.
Naheed was _— slaughtered with sharp

weapon/'Churi'. Hence, the said Naib Subedar
Nawab

Bakhti Rahman is the lodger of the first

information report.

2. It is under the statement of Javaid-
ur-Rahman husband of the deceased that after
being satisfied named the present Petitioner
Raweed Shah to have slaughtered his wife.
Earlier to, Mst. Saeeda wife of Irshad and Mst.
Hameeda wife of Fazal Khalid who are sisters
of the deceased Mst. Naeed have recorded their
separate statements. No one has been charged
except that a person leaving the house of the
deceased with features of short stature, bald and
having short beard, whose cloths were stained
with blood was coming out of the said house.
The said person can be indentified if brought

before each of the sister of the deceased.

3. Prior to, Application No. 405/4 of
the year 2016 for the grant of bail was
dismissed by the Court of learned Additional
Sessions Judge/Izafi Zila Qazi at Dargai vide
the order dated 06.12.2016 for the all detailed

reasons mentioned therein.
Nawab

4. Having heard arguments of learned
counsel for the Petitioner, learned counsel for
the complainant and learned State counsel,

record with their assistance gone through.

5. Learned counsel for the Petitioner
mainly relied upon 2016 YLR Note 25
(@eshawar) "Sabir _Shah_vs_ Muhammad
Usman_and_ another", 2013 P Cr. L.J. 1580
(ahore)" Bilal Ahmad alias Bilali vs the State
and another" , pertaining to the grant of bail on
the basis of 'A/ibi' referred to 2016 MLD 1700
(Peshawar) "Aurangzeb _vs_the_ State_and
another" _and_ 2016 SCMR_ 18 "Zaigham

Ashraf vs the State and other". In the light of

these dictums of the Hon'ble superior Courts
prayed for bail. So much so_ with regard to
identification parade after nomination of the
accused he placed reliance on 20/3 P Cr. L J
1580 (Lahore) " Bilal Ahmad alias Bilali_vs
the State_and_another". Inversely, learned
counsel for the complainant referred to PLJ
2011 S.C. 40" Shoukat Iahi vs Javaid Igbal

etc" 2011 P CrL J 1623 (Peshawar) " Raj
Nawab

Muhammad Khan _ ys the State and others",

2013 YLR 1948 (Sindh) " Bakhsh Ali vs the
State and 7 others", 2014 YLR 1595
(Peshawar) " Alam Zar Khan ys the State and
another", 2012 P Cr. L J 975 (Sindh) " Abdul

Ghani_alias_ Ghani_vs the State", PLJ_ 2013
S.C. 615 " Rao Abdul Jabbar Khan vs Lahore
High Court". Supported by the arguments of
learned State counsel by way of wisdom
contained in 2012 YLR 1355 "Shah Jehan and
another vs the State" on the last seen evidence,

PLD _2003 Supreme Court 704 _ "Sh.

Muhammad Ahmad vs the State" and 2016 _P
Cr. L J 1790 (Peshawar) Mingora Bench Dar-
ul-Qaza_"Nisar_ Ahmad ys the State through
A.A.G", whereby the statement of the accused
recorded under section 161 Cr.P.C could be
taken into consideration when the occurrence is
unseen and opposed grant of bail to the

Petitioner.

6. Yes by the time the 'Murasila' was
drafted and the first information was lodged on

its basis the matter has been reported by the
Nawab

Post Commander Naib Subedar Bakhti Rahman.
When admittedly no one amongst relatives of
the deceased so much so even the husband was
not available to indentify anybody for the brutal

slaughtering of Mst. Naheed.

7. There seems to be improvements
when sisters of the deceased by the name of
Mst. Saeeda and Mst. Hameeda have come
forward on 20.8.2016 and stated that a person
being bald, short in height and having short
beard whose clothes were stained with blood
was coming out of the house of the deceased
empty handed. He can be identified if brought
before both of the sisters. When the
identification parade is given its due
consideration it is silent about the features given
by both of the sisters of the deceased. Even
identification parade was conducted after
nomination of the accused/Petitioner in the case
in hand by Javaid-ur-Rahman husband of the
deceased. While considering the bail petition its

effect would lose its efficacy.
Nawab

8. The evidence of last seen in view of
the arguments of the learned State counsel for
the State cannot be beneficial in the light of the
identification parade which is deficient with

regard to features of the accused/Petitioner.

9. For the time being unless the
prosecution witnesses step into witness-box and
further lead evidence in accordance with
identification parade of the Petitioner there are
reasons to believe that it is a case of further
inquiry and accused/Petitioner may take benefit

till his proper identification.

10. This is all tentative assessment
when observations of this Court shall not be
taken into consideration by the learned trial
Court while deciding the wheel of fortune of the
Petitioner either in his acquittal or conviction.
11. Petitioner in the developed scenario,
is entitled to the concession of bail subject to his
furnishing bail bonds in the sum of Rs.
200,000/- (Rupees two lac) with two sureties

each in the like amount to the satisfaction of
Nawab

learned Illaqa Qazi/Judicial Magistrate/MOD,
who shall ensure that the sureties are local,

reliable and men of means.

These are the reasons of my short of

even date.

Announced

Dt: 24.02.2017. JUDGE
