JUDGMENT SHEET
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT
PESHAWAR.
(JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT)

Cr. M BA No. 3147-P/2021.

Date of hearing 24.09.2021.

M/s. Zohra Durrani & Qazafi durrani, advocates for
the petitioner.

Mr. Inam Khan Yousfzai, Addl. AG for the State.

LAL JAN KHATTAK, J:- Petitioner Mosa Khan

son of Tor Gul alias Noor Gul through the instant
petition seeks his release on bail in case FIR No.
1533 dated 03.08.2021 under section 9D and 11C of
the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Narcotic Substances Act,
2019, registered against him at Police Station,
Pishtakhara, Peshawar, wherein he is charged for
trafficking 10,000 grams heroin and 6000 grams

amphetamine and possessing 20 gram heroin and 10

gram Ice.

2. Arguments heard and available record gone
through.

3. True that huge quantity of narcotic has

been recovered from secret cavity made in diggi
of the motorcar which was in full control and
possession of co-accused Muhammad Rafiq but
noticeable aspect of the case is that the petitioner
was found sitting on front seat of the vehicle at
the time of recovery. There is nothing on the case
file to show that either the petitioner was privy to
the bid of smuggling or was having any slightest

conscious knowledge about presence of the
recovered contraband in the car so as to show his
nexus with the foiled attempt of the smuggling.
Thus his participation in the crime needs further
consideration. No doubt 20 gram heroin and 10
gram ice has been recovered from direct
possession of the petitioner but ibid meager
quantity of contraband would not be made a base
to dub him as co-smuggler of the narcotic which

is subject matter of the instant case.

4. Tentative assessment of the available
record shows that the petitioner has made out a case
for the purpose of his release on bail, therefore, this
petition is allowed and it is directed that he be
released on bail provided he furnishes bail bonds in
the sum of Rs. 1,00,000/- with two sureties each in
the like amount to the satisfaction of Illaqa Magistrate,
who shall ensure that the sureties are local, reliable

and men of means.

JUDGE

Announced
24.09.2021.

Tariq Jan. PS. SB Mr. Justice Lal Jan Khattak, HJ
