Kifayat/*

JUDGMENT SHEET
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
D.IL.KHAN BENCH
(Judicial Department)
Cr.M.BA. No.248-D/2017.
Ghulam Rabbani
Vs.
The State ete.
JUDGMENT
Date of hearing: 28.8.2017.

Appellant-Petitioner By: Mr. Saleem Ullah Khan
Ranazai Advocate.

Respondent By: Mr Bahadar Khan Marwat Advocate

and Mr. Adana Ali A.A.G

SHAKEEL AHMAD, _J.- Through the instant
criminal miscellaneous bail petition No.248-D of
2017, petitioner Ghulam Rabbani has sought post
arrest bail in case FIR No.364 dated 17.4.2017,
under Sections 489-F PPC, registered at police
station Cantt:, D.I.Khan.

2. The allegation against the petitioner is
that he had issued cheque bearing No.5647774 of
Rs: 20,00,000/- to the complainant, which was
dishonoured when presented to the bank concerned.
3. The learned counsel for the petitioner
mainly argued that the offence with which the

accused-petitioner is charged, is not hit by the
Kifayat/*

-2-

restrictive clause of Section 497, Cr.P.C, therefore,
he is entitled for the concession of bail. He placed
reliance on order dated 18.5.2015 of this Court in
Cr.MB. No.167-D/2015, wherein bail was granted
to the accused.

4. As against that, the counsel for the
complainant submitted that the accused has
specifically been charged for issuing the cheque
which was dishonoured on presentation, which
reflects his dishonest intention. He further argued
that though the offence is not hit by restrictive
clause of Section 497, Cr.P.C, but is non-bailable
and the accused cannot claim bail as a matter of
right. The learned Asstt: A.G. representing the State,

supports the contention of learned counsel for the

petitioner.
5. Arguments heard and record perused.
6. Allegation against the petitioner is that

he issued a cheque bearing No.5647774 of Rs:
20,00,000/- to the complainant, which has allegedly
been dishonoured on presentation before the bank
concerned. As alleged in the FIR, there was business
dealings between the parties and the petitioner has
taken Rs: 20,00,000/- from the complainant as loan

and he had issued the cheque for re-payment of the said
Kifayat/*

-3-

amount. The business dealing between the parties is
admitted, as in the instant case, the Courts normally
allow bail in such like cases. In this respect

reference can well be made to the case titled

“Muhammad Akbar Vs. The State” (2005 P.Cr.L.J

677), wherein it was held as under:-

“6. From the perusal of the record it
reveals that it is a case of business
dealing and transaction between the
petitioner and the complainant;
therefore, the matter between the
petitioner and the complainant is that
of civil nature. Moreover, the offence
against the petitioner does not fall
within the prohibitory clause. The
maximum punishment provided for the
offence is three years whereas the
petitioner is behind the bars for the last
fourteen months and there is no
progress in the trial and the continued
custody of the petitioner is not likely to
serve any beneficial purpose rather
same would amount to punishment
before conviction, which is not
permissible under the criminal
jurisprudence. Moreover, where the
business transactions are admitted the
Courts have allowed bail and in this
regard, reliance is placed on the cases
of Muhammad Akbar v. The State 2005
P.Cr.L.J 677, Rana Ehsan v. The State
2004 YLR 2675, Major Anwar-ul-Haq
v. The State PLD 2005 Lah. 607 and
Haq Nawaz Khan v. The State 2006
YLR 50”.

In similar situation, the Honourable Supreme

Court in a recent judgment “Muhammad Sarfaraz

Vs. The State” (2004 SCMR 1032), held that:-
Kifayat/*

-4-

“The complainant however alleges that
this was a ‘self cheque’ and therefore,
it was issued to him and accordingly
the dishonouring of the cheque would
attract the provisions of section 489-F,
P.P.C. He has also mentioned that the
amount covered by the cheque was paid
by the complainant to the petitioner
from time to time for the purposes of
the business and it is for the return of
such amount. Contrarily, on further
query, there is no evidence available
with the complainant as to how, when
and by what process various amounts
were paid to the petitioner for business
purposes. To that end, these aspects of
the matter have not been taken into
consideration by the learned High
Court while declining bail to the
petitioner. We find these contours of the
case to be quite conspicuous and
relevant entitling the petitioner to bail
when the case does not fall within the
prohibitory clause and the maximum
sentence for the offence under section
489-F, P.P.C. is three years. At the
same time, the petitioner is behind the
bars for the last about six months ”.

7. The offence with which the petitioner is
charged does not fall within the prohibition
contained in section 497(1), Cr.P.C. as the
maximum punishment for the offence under Section
489-F PPC is three years or fine or both and in such
like cases, grant of bail is rule, while refusal is an
exception, as held by the apex Court in case titled
“Riaz Jafar_Natiqg Vs. Muhammad Nadeem Dar

and others (2011 SCMR 1708), wherein it was held

as under:-
Kifayat/*

-5-

“Thus keeping in view the law laid

down in the case of Zafar Igbal V.
Muhammad Anwar and others” (2009

SCMR 1488) ordaining that granting

bail must be favourably considered and

should only be declined in exceptional

cases”.
8. Bail can only be declined in exceptional
cases, which are to be taken into consideration
depending upon each case. In such like case which
do not fall within the prohibition contained in
Section 497, Cr.P.C, exceptional circumstances may
be i.e. (a) where there is likelihood of abscondence
of the accused (b) where there is apprehension of
tampering with the prosecution evidence; (c) where
there is danger of the offence being repeated, if the
accused is released on bail; and (d) where accused
is a previous convict, this principle has been
enunciated in the judgment of Honourable Supreme
Court of Pakistan in case titled “Subhan Khan Vs.
The State” (2002 _SCMR_1797). No exceptional
circumstances exist in the instant case to refuse bail
to the accused. Moreso, the petitioner was arrested
on 22.4.2017, he is behind the bar for the last more
than four months, the investigation in the instant

case is complete and he is no more required to the

investigating agency for the purpose of investigation
Kifayat/*

-6-

and no useful purpose would be served, if he is kept
in jail.

9. In view of what has been discussed
above, this bail petition is allowed and the accused is
directed to be released on bail subject to furnishing
bail bonds in the sum of Rs:3,00,000/- with two
sureties each in the like amount to the satisfaction of
Illaqa/Duty Judicial Magistrate, who shall ensure
that the sureties must be local, reliable and men of
means.

Announced.
Dt: 28.8.2017. JUDGE
