JUDGMENT SHEET

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
PESHAWAR
(Judicial Department)

Cr.Misc.BA No.1833-P/2015
Date of hearing:
Petitioner (s) :
Respondent (s) :
JUDGMENT

ASSADULLAH KHAN CHAMMKANI, J.- Petitioners

1, Gul Muhammad and 2. Maaz Ullah, seek bail in case FIR
No.395 dated 04.09.2014, registered under sections
302/324/452/34 PPC, in Police Station Tangi, District
Charsadda, on the ground of compromise, arrived at between
them and LRs of deceased Mst. Mehbooba. Earlier the
petitioners was granted bail by learned Judicial Magistrate-I,
Tangi, on merits, vide order dated 09.05.2015, but the same
was subsequently re-called/ cancelled by learned Additional
Sessions Judge, Charsaddat at Tangi, by accepting bail
cancellation petition of complainant Hazrat Shah, vide order
dated 04.06.2015. However, during pendency of trial,
petitioners entered into a compromise with all the major LRs
of the deceased except Mst. Mahida (one of the daughters of
the deceased), consequent whereupon, the petitioners

approached the learned Trial Court for bail on fresh ground

of compromise, but their request was turned down due to
incomplete compromise, hence, this petition.

2. The prosecution case is that on 04.09.2014 at
10.45 hours, complainant Hazrat Shah, in company of dead
body of his mother-in-law Mst. Mehbooba, reported to local
police in casualty of Tangi hospital Charsadda, that on the
fateful he alongwith his mother-in-law and relative PW Ihsan
Ullah, was present in her house, when at 0.40 hours, both the
petitioners alongwith absconding co-accused Gul Siyar and
Inayat Ullah, duly armed with deadly weapons, entered her
house and opened firing at them with the intention to do them
away, resultantly, his mother-in-law got hit and died on the
spot, while they luckily remained unscathed. In addition to
him, the incident is stated to have been witnessed by PW
Ihsan Ullah. A previous blood feud inter-se one Mehboob Ali
Khan and the accused over landed property has been alleged
as motive behind the incident, hence, this case.

3. Learned counsel for the petitioner argued that
in the incident only Mst. Mehbooba wife of Akhtar Munir
has lost her life while complainant Hazrat Shah and PW
Ihsan Ullah has not sustained any injury; that all the major
LRs of the deceased Mst. Mehbooba except one, have
entered into a compromise with the petitioners and have

pardoned them in the name of Almighty Allah by waiving

their rights of Qisas and Diyat while share of diyat of minor
daughter of deceased, namely, Mst. Tasleem has been paid;
that a proper compromise has been produced and joint
statement of the LRs of the deceased has been recorded at the
identification of the elders/Jirga members by the learned
Trial Court; that only major LR (daughter) of deceased
Mst. Mahida has not been entered into a compromise with the
petitioners and in such eventualities, she would only be
entitled to her share in Diyat within the meaning of section
309 PPC. He contended that no doubt, under section 311
PPC, where all the Walis do not waive or compound the right
of Qisas or if the principle of fasad-fil-arz is attracted the
Court may having regard to the facts and circumstances of
the case, punish an offender against whom the right of qisas
has been waived or compounded, with death or imprisonment
for life or imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to fourteen years but shall not be less than
ten years as Ta’azir, however, learned counsel added that on
one hand, the facts and circumstances required under section
311 PPC to warrant conviction of the petitioners under Tazir,
are yet to be brought and determined by the learned Trial
Court during trial, while on the other hand, by use of word
“may” the matter of punishment under section 311 PPC, has

been left on the discretions of the Court and such discretions

are always exercised by the Courts in the large interest of the
society keeping in view the principles of substantial justice
He while referring to explanation to $.311 PPC, which says
that for the purpose of section 311 PPC, the expression fasad
fil Arz shall include the past conduct of the offender, or
whether he has any previous conviction or the brutal or
shocking manner in which the offence has been committed
which is outrageous to the public conscience or the offence
relates to honour crime or if the offender is considered a
potential danger to the community or if the offence has been
committed in the name or on the pretext of honour,
contended that no such evidence at the moment is on the
record to bring the case of the petitioners within the ambit of
explanation to $.311 PPC and contended that the ingredients
of explanation to 8.311 PPC, could only be determined after
recording evidence by the learned Trial Court. He contended
that admittedly, complainant and PW Ishan Ullah the alleged
eyewitness have not entered into a compromise with the
petitioners, but they are neither LRs of the deceased nor have
sustained any injury in the incident. He added that in case of
refusal of bail, if the prosecution fails to bring the facts and
circumstances contemplated under section 311 there would
be no proper justification for the unjustified incarceration of

the petitioners while in case of release of the petitioners on

compromise, on one hand it would be in the large interest of
the future relationship of the parties, while on the other hand,
if the prosecution succeeds in bringing the facts and
circumstances within the meaning of $.311, the Court may
convict them at the end of trial. He contended refusal of bail
to the petitioner would spoil the efforts conducted by elders
in burying the hatchets of the parties, and the parties will
once again resort to their previous position, which would be
against the principles of substantial justice. He requested for
release of the petitioners on bail.

4. Learned counsel for the complainant strongly
opposed the contentions of learned counsel for the petitioners
and contended that complainant and PW Ihsan Ullah, the
eyewitnesses of the incident are still stuck to their stance and
have not entered into any compromise with the petitioners;
that the compromise is incomplete and a prima facie case still
in light of statements of the eyewitnesses coupled with other
corroborative pieces of evidence, still exists against the
petitioners, punishment of which falls within the Prohibitory
Clause of S.497 Cr.P.C., hence, the learned Trial Court has
rightly refused bail to the petitioners by not considering the
incomplete compromise.

4. Learned State counsel supported the arguments

of learned counsel for the complainant.

5. I have heard the exhaustive submissions
advanced from either side and perused the record carefully.

6. In this untoward incident Mst. Mehboob has
been done to death with firearms, for which the petitioners
and absconding co-accused Gul Siyar and Inayat Ullah, have
been charged by complainant Hazrat Shah and PW Ihsan
Ullah. The above named two PWs have also charged the
accused for attempting at their lives by ineffective firing. The
husband of Mst. Mehbooba deceased is already dead, while
Abdur Rashid, Imran and Ziarat Gul (sons), Mst. Naheed and
Mst. Parveen (daughters) of the deceased/ major LRs, have
entered into a compromise with the petitioners, consequent
whereupon, they have pardoned them in the name of
Almighty Allah, by waving their rights of Qisas and Diayt.
To this effect their joint statement has already been recorded
by the learned Trial Court at the identification of Sartaj and
Fazal Wahab (elders/Jirga members), who also
acknowledged the compromise to be genuine, without any
pressure and coercion. For minor LRs of deceased
Mst. Tasleem Rs.2,20,000/- as her share in Diyat, has been
deposited in National Saving Center Charsadda. The only
major LR (daughter) of the deceased is Mst. Mahida, who

has not yet entered into a compromise with the petitioners.

7. The moot questions for determination before
me are that what could be the expected punishment in case of
partial compromise under ta’zir, in case the prosecution
succeeds in proving the guilt of the petitioners and that would
be the impact of refusal of bail on the future relationship of
the parties.
8. To clarify the legal position of the issue
involved in the case, it would be advantageous to reproduced
sections 309, 310, 311 PPC and 345 Cr.P.C. which are
relevant in this regard.
“8.309 PPC. Waiver-Afw of qisas in
qatl-i-amd:- (1) In the case of qatl-i-amd an
adult sane wali may, at any time and without
any compensation, waive his right of qisas:
Provided that the right of qisas shall not
be waived:
(a) Where the Government is the wali; or
(b) Where the right of gisas vests in a minor
or insane
(2) Where a victim has more than one wali,
any one of them may waive his right of
qisas;
Provided that the wali who does not

waive the right of gisas shall be entitled to

his share of diyat. (the underline are for
emphasis).
(3) Where there are more than one victim,
the waiver of right of qisas by the wali or one
victim shall not affect the right of qisas of the
wali or the other victim.
(4) Where there are more than one offenders,
the waiver of right of qisas against one
offender shall not affect the right of qisas
against the other offender.
8.310 PPC. Compounding of qisas (Sulh)
in qatl-i-amd:- (1) In the case of qatl-i-amd,
an adult san wali may, at any time on
accepting badal-i-sulh, compound his right of
qisas.

Provided that a female shall not be given
in marriage or otherwise, in badal-i-sulh.
(2) Where a wali is a minor or an insane, the
wali of such minor or insane wali may
compound the right of qisas on behalf of
such minor or insane wali.

Provided that the value of badal-i-sulah,

shall not be less than the value of diyat.
(4) Where the badal-i-sulh is not determined
or is property or a right the value of which
cannot be determined in terms of mony under
shariah the right of qisas shall be deemed to
have been compounded and the offender
shall be liable to diyat.

(5) Badal-i-sulh may be paid or given on
demand or on a deferred date as may be
agreement upon between the offender and the
wali.

Explanation:-In this section badal-i-sulh
means the mutually agreed compensation
according to Shariah to be paid or given by
the offender to a wali in cash or in kind or in
the form of movable or immovable property.
3.11. PPC. Tazir after waiver or
compounding of right of qisas in qatl-i-
amd:- Notwithstanding anything containing
in section 309 or section 310 PPC, where all
the walis do not waive or compound the
right of qisas, or if the principle of fasad-fil-
arz is attracted the Court may, having regard
to the facts and circumstances of the case,

punish an offender against whom the right
10

of qisas has been waived or compounded
with death or imprisonment for life or
imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to fourteen years as
Ta’zir but shall not be less than ten years as
Tazir.

Provided that if the offence has been

committed in the name or on the pretext of
honour the imprisonment shall not be less
than ten years.
Explanation:- For the purpose of this
section, the expression fasad fil arz shall
include the past conduct of the offender
or whether he has any previous conviction
or the brutal or shocking manner in
which the offence has been committed
which is outrageous to the _ public
conscience or if the offender is considered
a potential danger to the community or if
the offence has been committed in the
name or on the pretext of honour.

S.345 Cr.P.C. Compounding of offences:-
11

2. The offences punishable under the sections
of the Pakistan penal code specified in the
first two column of the table next following
may with the permission of the court before
which any prosecution for such offence is
pending be compounded by the persons

mentioned in the third column of that table.

Offences Sections of PPC | Persons by whom offence may
applicable be compounded
Qatl-i-amd 302 By the heirs of the victims [other than

the accused or the convict] if the offence
has been committed by him in the name
or on the pretext of karo kari, siyah kari

or similar other customs or practices

S.309 PPC pertaining to waiver (Afw) and S.310 PPC
pertaining to compounding (Sulh) in cases of murder are
relevant only to cases of Qisas and not Tazir. In case of
Ta’zir the matter of compromise between the parties is
governed and regulated by the provisions of 8.345 (2)
Cr.P.C. read with section 338-E PPC. Since, the trial is in
progress and the petitioners have not been awarded any
punishment under ta’azir, therefore, at the moment, the case

of the petitioner would not fall within the ambit of $.345 (2)

12

Cr.P.C. read with S.338-E PPC. If the petitioners had already
been awarded punishment under Ta’azir and thereafter the
LRs of the deceased entered into compromise with them,
then their case would be seen and adjudged in light of
provisions of $.345 (2) Cr.P.C. read with $.338-E PPC. At
the moment, the compromise falls within the ambit of $.309
and 310 PPC. But since, Mst. Mahida one of the LR of the
deceased has not compounded the offence or waived her right
of Qisas, therefore, she would be entitled to share of her
Diyat in light of provisions of section 309 PPC, which says
that the wali who does not waive the right of qisas shall be
entitled to his share of diyat. No doubt, under 311 PPC, the
Court in its discretion despite waiver or compounding of
right of qisas in qatl-i-amd, could inflict punishment of death
or imprisonment for life or imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to fourteen years but
shall not be less than ten years. However, by use of word
“may” in section 311 PPC, the discretion has been squarely
left with the Court. Besides, under explanation to $.311 PPC,
certain essential ingredients have been provided to be
considered by the Court while inflicting punishment under
Tazir in cases of compromsise, which includes the past
conduct of the offender, his previous conviction or the brutal

or shocking manner in which the offence has been committed

13

which is outrageous to the public conscience or the offence
relates to honour crime or if the offender is considered a
potential danger to the community or if the offence has been
committed in the name or on the pretext of honour. At the
moment nothing is on the file to bring the case of the
petitioners within the meaning of explanation attached to
section 311 PPC. Rather, the facts and circumstances as well
as the ingredients to warrant punishment of the petitioners
under Ta’zir, are yet to be brought and proved during trial.

10. As stated earlier neither complainant nor PW
Ishanullah has sustained any injury. All the major legal heirs
of Mst. Mehbooba deceased except her daughter Mst.
Mahida, have pardoned the petitioners in the name of
Almighty Allah by waiving their rights of qisas and diyat.
The share of minor LR in diyat has already been paid. The
facts and circumstances or the ingredients of Fasad-fil-arz,
are yet to be proved against the petitioners by the prosecution
during trial. However, keeping in view the prospect of the
compromise on future relationship of the parties, who have
buried their hatchets, it would be in the large interest of the
parties and justice to extend the concession of bail to the
petitioners, otherwise, the entire efforts of compromise will
prove spoil and the parties will again bring out their swords

against each other. Besides, punishment to be awarded under

14

section 311 PPC, is the discretion of the Court and the Courts
keeping in view the principles of substantial justice as well as
the norms, customs, traditions of the society as well as the
future apprehension of indulgence of the parties in enmity
again, should exercise such discretions in a judicious manner.
The complainant and PW Ihanullah have their own case and
are still at liberty to prove their version, fate of which will be
decided by the learned Trial Court at the conclusion of trial.
The release of the petitioners on bail will not prejudice the
case of the prosecution. It is settled law that bail may not be
withheld as a punishment because a mistaken relief of bail
can be repaired by convicting an accused, but no proper
reparation could be offered to him for his unjustified
incarceration, albeit, his acquittal in the long run.

11. In light of what has been discussed above, this
petition is allowed. The petitioners are admitted to bail on the
sole ground of compromise, provided each one of them
furnishes bail bonds in the sum of Rs.3,00,000/- with two
local, reliable and resourceful sureties each in the like
amount to the satisfaction of learned Trial Court.

Announced

03.11.2015 JUDGE

*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

15
*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

16
*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

17
18

7. For what has been discussed above, Suo motu
notice given to accused Shakir stands withdrawn. He is
admitted to bail on already existing bail bonds, on merits.
Since this court has already directed expeditious
conclusion of trial while dealing with the bail petition of
co-accused Farman, therefore, office is directed to send the
record to the quarter concerned within two days, positively.
announced:

19.10.2015

JUDGE

*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

19
*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

20
