-1-

JUDGMENT SHEET

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT.

Criminal Appeal.............NO......... 200-P..............0f....... 2014

JUDGMENT

D.O.Hearing: 17.01.2017 D.O.Announcement 02.02.2017

Petitioner(s): (Ihsan Ullah) by Mr. Arshad Ali Nowshervi
Advocate.

Respondent(s): (State) by Mr. Rab Nawaz Khan, Additional
Advocate General.

ISHTIAQ IBRAHIM, J.- {hsan Ullah, the

appellant, was found in possession of 490 kilograms of
“Charas” while transporting the same through truck to Kohat
alongwith two un-licenced Kalashankov rifles. A case under
Section 9(c) of the Control of Narcotic Substances Act, 1997 /
Section 13 of the Arms Ordinance, 1965 was registered against
him vide FIR No.134, dated 31.01.2013 in Police Station City,
Kohat. After his arrest and completion of investigation, he
was sent to the Court of learned Additional Sessions Judge /
Judge, Special Court, Kohat for trial, who, on its conclusion,
convicted him under Section 9(c) of the CNSA and sentenced
him to “Imprisonment for Life” with a fine of Rs.10,00,000/- or
in default thereof, to suffer further two years imprisonment.
He has also convicted him under Section 13 of the Arms

Ordinance and sentenced him to “Three Years” simple
-2-

imprisonment by extending him benefit of Section 382-B,

Cr.PC vide judgment dated 18.03.2014. Hence, this appeal.

2. It was vehemently contended by the learned
counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant that neither the
appellant is driver of the vehicle nor its owner; that he has no
concern, whatsoever, with the alleged contraband as well as
the Kalashankov rifles; that the police officials in order to let
the actual culprits, who have committed the crime, made him
scapegoat in the instant case in order to show their efficiency
to their high-ups; that neither he was present on the spot nor
was arrested there-from; that the major portion of the entire
evidence was conducted by the complainant himself in a very
haphazard manner; that neither the alleged truck nor the
alleged Kalashankov rifles were produced before the Court
during the trial for exhibition; that the FSL report totally
negates the alleged recovery of the contraband; that the
original owner was neither made accused nor made witness so
as to dig out the hidden truth; that the impugned judgment is
based on misreading and non-reading of evidence and is also
against the law and facts of the case, is based upon surmises
and conjectures; that despite of busy place, no private witness
was mentioned in the murasila nor was associated with the
investigation; that there are many material contradictions

between the statements of the star witnesses of the
3-

prosecution, which creates doubts in the recovery of
contraband; that there is un-explained delay in sending the
samples to the FSL, which seriously affects its genuineness;
that sealing of the entire stuff is also doubtful, which also
makes the case of the prosecution doubtful. In the end, the
learned counsel submitted that inflicting punishment of ‘life
imprisonment’, with a huge amount of fine, in view of the
afore-noted infirmities and loopholes in the prosecution case,
is too harsh and not justified therefore, the appellant be

acquitted from the charges levelled against him.

3. As against that the learned Additional Advocate
General appearing on behalf of the State by supporting the
impugned judgment vehemently argued that the appellant
was arrested red-handed on the spot while he was attempting
to smuggle a huge quantity of narcotics weighing 490
kilograms of ‘Charas’ alongwith two un-licenced Kalashankov
rifles; that such a huge quantity of narcotics, amounting
millions of rupees, couldn't be planted against him; that he has
failed to establish any malice or mala fide on the part of the
prosecution witnesses and he couldn’t dispute his presence on
the spot; therefore, his conviction and sentences are justified

and legal, be upheld accordingly.
-4-

4. We have gone through the available record
carefully and considered the submissions made by the learned

counsel for both the parties.

5. The record of the case would reveal that there are
glaring major and material contradictions between the
statements of the material witnesses of the prosecution ice.
Iqbal Muhammad, Inspector / complainant (PW-2),
Rehmatullah Khan, ASI / marginal witness (PW-3); Gul
Razim Khan, SI / IO (PW-4) and Majid Khan, constables
(PW-6), who was present with the complainant at the
relevant time. They are not consistent with each other on very
important point that where-from the truck was coming and
where it was proceeding / going; which constable / driver took
the truck to the police line; which type of tools / machinery
used in cutting of the secret cavities; who brought those and
what were the names of the same; how many secret cavities in
the truck / vehicle and how many packets were in each cavity
and from which portion / cavity of the truck, the Kalashankov

rifles were recovered.

6. There are two episodes of the prosecution case,
first is initial interception of truck by Shahidur Rehman, LHC
and his companions; second is the recovery, which was
effected in police lines, when truck was taken there. Only one

PW namely, Majid Khan, who apprehended the truck in
-5-

question, was examined from the police contingent. This
witness is mute that who was driving the truck at the relevant
time. Besides, he is eyewitness of the occurrence, but has not
seen the person, who was sitting on the steering wheel of the
vehicle in question at the relevant time because when the
SHO arrived on the spot, the truck was already stopped by
them and was parked there. Complainant is admittedly not
witness to the effect that the person-appellant was in fact was
on the steering wheel of the vehicle and he was driving it at
the time of occurrence. It has been established from this
witness (PW-6), who disclosed it in the manner that “we didn’t
accompany the SHO to the police lines to see the other proceedings carried
out in the police lines, Kohat. No other proceedings were carried out in my
presence afterwards”. He refers the police contingent including
Shahidur Rehman, who intercepted the truck in question at
the first instance, then how PW Shahidur Rehman signed the
recovery memo, which was as per prosecution version was
prepared in police lines, Kohat. The evidence of the
prosecution is also inconsistent regarding the opening of the

secret cavities.

7. It is very strange to observe that very important
witness of the prosecution ie. Shahidur Rehman, LHC, who
first received the information about transporting of huge

quantity of narcotics in the vehicle / truck, number of which
-6-

was specifically told to him by his informer, was not produced
before the Court during the trial and was abandoned by the
prosecution being unnecessary, from his statement, many
hidden things could have come on the surface because he was
the prime witness of the prosecution, that too, when he was
very much present on the spot, when the truck was
intercepted at the first instance and thereafter, the entire
proceedings were conducted by the complainant in his
presence at police lines, therefore, his statement was very
necessary; whereafter he also signed the recovery memo,

Exh.PW-2/L.

8. So far as, role of Gul Razim, SI (PW-4), who has
conducted the so-called investigation in the instant case is
concerned, except recording stereotype statements of the
PWs; preparation of site plan and obtaining custody of the
appellant, he has done nothing important, which could go in
his favour. Despite the fact that it was come on the record that
the truck / vehicle was actually owned by one Malik
Muhammad Younas, neither he made him accused nor
witness nor made any efforts that whether he sold this vehicle
to the present appellant and, interestingly, he didn’t make any
efforts to trace out him. He didn’t inquire from any witness
qua the direction of the truck because it is still mystery.

Neither the case property was handed over to him nor he seen
-7-

it in the opened condition. He was totally unaware about the
weighment of the recovered contraband and from which scale,
the same was done and also was unaware about the
separation of samples from each packet. He had also not
investigated the case on the line that who was the actual seller
of the narcotics and who was its purchaser. No doubt, the
appellant remained in his custody for five days but he failed to
extract even a single word from his mouth qua the ownership
of the narcotics. Even he didn’t record statement of any
mechanic / person, who opened the secret cavities of the
vehicle nor he took into possession of those tools, nor the

scale, botts etc.

9. Another striking feature of the case is that, the
persons / police officials, who took the case property / samples
to the FSL and, in whose custody, it was lying till its despatch
ie. 04.02.2013, were not examined during trial. Besides, the
“Truck”, from which, huge quantity of narcotics recovered,
was not produced before the Court, so as to be examined by
the Court that whether actually the truck existed and there
were secret cavities, which could contained such a huge
quantity of narcotics and were opened with machine or tools
and also those tools / machines were not produced before the
Court for exhibition rather for awarding — stringent

punishment to the appellant, only photographs of the truck
-8-

were not sufficient for the perusal of the Court. Likewise, the
Kalashankov rifles were also not produced before the Court
during the trial so could see whether those, actually, were in
working condition or not or were dummy weapons. When
this being the state of affairs, we come to the safe conclusion
that besides defective investigation, the mode and manner of
arrest of the accused and recovery of contraband are highly
doubtful as the prosecution didn’t prove its case beyond any
shadow of doubt and, any doubt, if arising in links of the chain
of prosecution story, the benefit of same would go to accused
and such like contradictions in the prosecution evidence
doesn’t justify the conviction and sentence of the appellant for
the safe administration of criminal justice. It is not necessary
that there should be many circumstances creating doubt. If
there is a circumstance, which creates reasonable doubt in the
prudent mind about the guilt of accused, then accused will be
entitled to the benefit not as a matter of grace and concession
but as a matter of right and even a single doubt, if found
reasonable, is sufficient to warrant the acquittal of the
accused. We, in the circumstance of the case, don’t think that
the case can be said to have been proved against the appellant

beyond any shadow of doubt.

10. For the reasons discussed above, this criminal

appeal is allowed, the conviction and sentences recorded by
-9-

the learned Trial Court vide the impugned judgment dated
18.03.2014 are set aside and the appellant namely, Ihsan Ullah,
is acquitted of the charges, levelled against him. He be set free

forthwith, if not required in any other criminal case.

Announced

02. 02. 2017 JUDGE

JUDGE

(Fayaz)
