IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,

PESHAWAR,
{Qudicial Department}.

Jail Cri. Appeal No.1185-P/2018

Inayat-ur-Rehman son of Sher Bahadur,
r/o Musam Kuroona, District Mardan.

Appellant (s)
VERSUS
The State etc
Respondent (s)
For Appellant (s) :- Mr. Shabbir Hussain Gigyani, Advocate.
For State - Mr. Muhammad Nisar, AAG.
For complainant :- Nemo
Date of hearing: 03.02.2022
JUDGMENT

ROOH-UL-AMIN KHAN, _J:-This Jail criminal appeal, filed
by Inayat-ur-Rehman, the appellant, is directed against the
judgment dated 27.11.2018, passed by learned Additional
Sessions Judge-IV, Mardan, whereby the appellant having been
found guilty of committing gatl-e-amd of Hazir Zaman deceased
with firearm, has been convicted and sentenced under section
302(b) PPC to undergo life imprisonment and to pay a fine of
Rs.10,000/- or in default thereof to undergo one month further
simple imprisonment (S.I.) and under section 15 KP Arms
Act, 2015 to undergo 05 years S.I. and to pay a fine of Rs,2000/-
or in default thereof to undergo 10 days S.L., in case FIR No.139
dated 02.04.2014, under section 302 PPC and Section 15 KP
Arms Act, 2013, Police Station Par Hoti, Mardan. Benefit of

Section 382-B Cr.P.C. has been extended to the appellant.
J.Cr.A. No L185-P/2018

2. The prosecution’s case as unfolded in the First
Information Report (“FIR”) Exh.PA is that on 02.04.2014 at
2015 hours, complainant Mst. Musarrat (PW.3), in company of
dead body of Hazir Zaman her deceased husband, reported to
Itbar Shah Khan SI (PW.2), in Casualty Hospital Mardan, to the
effect that as appellant Inayat-ur-Rehman was teasing and
compelling her son Shahab for keeping illicit relation with him,
therefore, on 02.04.2014, she along with her deceased husband
went to the house of the appellant to complain him about his
illegal demand. The deceased remained outside the house of the
appellant and she went inside the house. When she complained
the appellant that her son Shahab is too young (minor), therefore,
do not tease and harass him, the appellant got infuriated, took a
pistol and rushed outside the house. She followed him and the
appellant when reached near the deceased, he opened fire at him;
as a result, the deceased got hit and died on the spot. Motive
behind the occurrence was the aforesaid complaint of
complainant. Her report was recorded in the shape of Murasila
Exh.PA/1 by Itbar Shah Khan SI (PW.2), on the basis of which

“ FIR Exh.PA was registered against the appellant. Itbar Shah SI

also prepared injury sheet Exh.PW.2/1 and inquest report

Exh.PW.2/2 of the deceased and shifted his dead body to the

mortuary for postmortem examination under the escort of

Constable Sohail.
JCr.A. No.1185-P/2018
3. On 02.04.2014 at 1900 hours, Dr. Sajid Khan, conducted

autopsy on the dead body of the deceased and found the

following injuries on his body vide PM report Exh.PM.

1. Firearm entrance wound '% inch in size on
left buttock.

2. Firearm exist wound 1x1 inch in size on left
ingunail area.

Opinion:- According to his opinion the deceased
sustained fatal firearm injury to the left femoral
(great) artery leading to heaving blood loss, shock and
death.

4 Muhammad Yaqoob Khan Inspector (PW.11), conducted

investigation in the case, who on receipt of copy of FIR,
proceeded to the spot and prepared site plan Exh.PB, on the
pointation of complainant. During spot inspection, he secured
blood through cotton from the place of deceased vide recovery
memo Exhd.PW.7/1 and .30 bore empty Exh.P.1 from the place
of the appellant vide recovery memo Exh.PW.7/2. Vide recovery
memo Exh.PW.7/3, he took into possession the last worn
bloodstained garments of the deceased and vide recovery memo
Exh.PW.1/1 he took into possession a 30 bore pistol Exh.P.3,
produced to him by Tawab Khan ASI/Moharrir. Appellant was
arrested by Muhammad Iqbal SHO (PW.13), who handed him
over to PW.11 and the latter after obtaining his physical remand
from the court of learned Judicial Magistrate, interrogated him
and recorded his statement under section 161 Cr.P.C. Vide
applications Exh.PW.11/3 and Exh.PW.11/4, respectively, he

sent the bloodstained articles and pistol along with empty to the
L.Cr.A, No.1185-P/2018
FSL for chemical analysis, reports of the FSL are Exh.PK and

Exh. PK/1, respectively. He also recorded statements of the PWs
under section 161 Cr.P.C., and on completion of investigation,
handed over case file to, who submitted challan against the
appellant before the learned trial Court.

5. On receipt of challan by the learned trial Court, the
appellant was summoned and formally charge sheeted to which
he pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. To prove its case, the
prosecution examined as many as thirteen witnesses. After
closure of the prosecution’s evidence, statement of the appellant
was recorded under section 342 Cr.P.C., wherein he denied the
prosecution’s allegation and professed his innocence. He,
however, declined to be examined on oath under section
340 (2) Cr.P.C., or to produce evidence in defence. On
conclusion of trial, the learned trial court, after hearing both the
sides, convicted and sentenced the appellant as mentioned above,
hence, this appeal.

6. Despite service, complainant is not in attendance,
therefore, after hearing learned counsel for the appellant and
learned AAG for the State this appeal is being decided on merit
on the available record.

7. Record reveals that in this case the occurrence has taken
place on 02.04.2014 at 1900 hours, in front of the house of
appellant, situated in village Mosom Koroona, District Mardan,
which has been reported by complainant Mst. Musarat (PW.3),

widow of Hazir Zaman deceased, wherein she has directly and
J.Cr.A. No,1185-P/2018

singularly charged the appellant for committing murder of her
deceased husband with pistol. Complainant Mst. Musarat (PW.3)
and her son Shahab (PW.6), have furnished ocular account of the
oceurrence and for corroboration of the ocular account of the
above named witnesses, the prosecution has placed reliance on
circumstantial/corroboratory pieces of evidence in the shape of
recovery of blood from the spot, last worn bloodstained garments
of the deceased, positive Serologist report Exh.PK in respect
therefore, recovery of .30 bore crime empty from the spot from
the place of the appellant, recovery of 30 bore pistol from
possession of the appellant at the time of his arrest by
Muhammad Iqbal (PW.13) and positive FSL report Exh.PK/1
qua the crime pistol and crime empty coupled with medical
evidence in the shape of autopsy report of the deceased and
statement of the Medical Officer who conducted autopsy on the
dead body of the deceased.
8. Mst. Musarat complainant while appearing as PW.3
reiterated the same story in her examination-in-chief, as set forth
by her in the initial report Exh.PA/1, however, for the sake of
convenience and ready reference, we are going to reproduced her
examination-in-chief below:-
/ “Khazir Zaman deceased was my husband and

PW Shahab is my son. Accused Inayat ur Rehman used

to pursuit my minor son Shahab for illicit relation and

also teased him, due to which, we also picked him from

school and his studies discontinued for this reason. On
r

LCA, No.1185-P/201

the date and time of occurrence, I along with my
deceased husband Khazir Zaman went to the house of
Inayat ur Rehman accused to complain his ill activities
regarding my son. My husband remained outside the
house and I entered the house of accused and made a
complaint and also requested him not to do the same with
my son Shahab as he is a minor. On this, Inayat ur
Rehman accused got annoyed and infuriated. He took a
pistol, went out the house. I followed him and as he
reached near my husband, all of a sudden he started firing
at him, as a result, my husband Khazir Zaman got hit and
died on the spot. I with the help of my son Fazil and other
co-villagers took the dead body of the deceased to
hospital where I made report in the shape of Murasila
Exh.PA. The same was read over to me and I thumb
impressed and was also signed by my son Fazil. The site
plan was also prepared at my instance by the I.0. Motive
for the occurrence was that Inayat ur Rehman accused
was teasing my son minor Shahab for illicit relation and
on my complaint he got infuriated and committed murder
of my husband. I charge him for commission of the
offence.”
9. She has been subjected to lengthy and taxing cross-
examination, but nothing beneficial to defence, could be extracted
from her mouth. She remained stuck on her stance as set forth by
him in the initial report, rather, in her cross-examination the

events which remained un-clarified during her examination-in-
LCr.A. No.1185-P/2018
chief, have been clarified from her by the defence itself. Nothing

has been extracted from her mouth so as to suggest false
implication of the appellant by substituting the real culprit. She
has reported the occurrence with promptitude i.e. within 1 hour
and 15 minutes, eliminating the possibility of consultation and
deliberation on her part in making report. As per her statement,
she entered into the house of the appellant and her deceased
husband stayed outside and when she made a complaint to
appellant teasing of her minor son, the appellant got infuriated,
picked a pistol and committed murder of the deceased, standing
outside his house. The statement of the complainant is appealable
to a prudent mind because in this part of the country, womenfolk
in the villages frequently and freely used to enter any house,
however, men are not permitted to do so without taking
permission. Entrance of the complainant in the house of the
appellant while waiting of her deceased husband outside the
house has been proved by the prosecution. Meeting of the
complainant and her conversation with the appellant prior to
occurrence inside the house not only eliminates the possibility of
mistaken identity but also establish the presence of appellant and

complainant at the house. Even otherwise, it does not appeal to a

&

v

prudent mind that complainant will substitute a real culprit for
murder of her husband by charging innocent person. Admittedly,
substitution of real culprit charged directly and singularly is a rare
phenomenon in the system of criminal justice. Reference in this

regard can be made to case titled, “Allah Ditta Vs the State”
JCrA. No.1185-P/2018

(PLD 2002 Supreme Court 52) and case titled, “Muhammad

Iqbal Vs the State” (PLD 2001 Supreme Court 222.
10. Recovery of blood from the spot from the place of the

deceased, his last worn bloodstained garments and positive
Serologist report Exh.PK in respect thereof, further corroborate
the ocular account of the complainant coupled with confirming
the place of occurrence to be the same as alleged by the
complainant. It appears from record that appellant was arrested
on the same day of occurrence by Muhammad Iqbal SHO, who
while appearing as PW.13 deposed that on 02.04.2014, he along
with other police officials arrested the appellant from a street
along with 30 bore pistol Exh.P.3 without number and five live
rounds, and he took the same into possession vide recovery
memo Exh.PW.12/1 in presence of its marginal witnesses and
thereafter handed over the pistol to Moharrir of the Police
Station. Sharf Gul No.713, who is marginal witness to recovery
memo Exh.PW.12/1 while appearing as PW.12, corroborated the
testimony of Iqbal Khan SHO by deposing that in his presence
the appellant was arrested by Iqbal Khan SHO and from his
possession a 30 bore pistol with five live rounds Exh.P.3 was
recovered. Both, Iqbal Khan SHO and Sharf Gul (PW.12), have
been subjected to lenghty cross-examination by defence but
nothing of the sort to make the recovery of the pistol doubtful,
has been extracted from their mouths. They have furnished
consistent statements and have corroborated each other on every

aspect of the recovery i.e. the day, date, time and place of arrest
LCrA, No.1185-P/2018
of the appellant and recovery of 30 bore pistol from his

possession. Record reveals that the crime pistol Exh.P.3 along
with .30 bore empty was sent to the FSL for analysis, report
whereof Exh.PK/.1 shows that the crime empty has been fired
from the pistol Exh.P.3, recovered from the appellant at the time
of his arrest. In this view of the matter, the above mentioned
pieces of circumstantial evidence further corroborate the ocular
version of complainant Mst. Musarat.

11. Dr. Sajjad Khan (PW.10), had conducted autopsy on the
dead body of the deceased and as per his statement and autopsy
report Exh.PM, the deceased had sustained solitary firearm
entrance wound with corresponding exist which resulted into his
unnatural death. Thus, the medical evidence also supports the
ocular account furnished by Mst. Musarat complainant.

12. On reappraisal of the testimony of PW Mst. Musrat
corroborated by circumstantial and medical evidence, we are firm
in our view to hold that she has furnished a truthful account of
the occurrence. Her presence with the deceased at the time of
occurrence was quite natural and appealable to a prudent mind.
13. It appears from record that PW Fazil, who has verified
the report of her mother/complainant Mst. Musrat, has been
abandoned by the prosecution, whereas, PW Shahab has been
examined as PW.6, who also pose himself as an eyewitness of the
occurrence. Honestly speaking, neither in the initial report
Exh.PA/I nor in her court statement as (PW.3), complainant

Mst. Musarat, has stated a single word about presence of PW
10
L.Cr,A, No.1185-P/2018

Shahab at the time of occurrence, therefore, we are not going to
consider the testimony of PW Shahab as an eyewitness, however,
his testimony to the extent of motive part is very much relevant.
PW Shahab while appearing as PW.6 deposed that appellant was
having a Karyana shop in a Mohallah adjacent to his house. He
used to visit his shop and when he felt that the appellant is having
bad eyes on him, he left visiting his shop. The appellant then told
him that he has some outstanding against him, therefore, he
should keep friendly relation with him. PW Shahab disclosed it to
his father and on the day of occurrence his parents went to the
house of the appellant for complaint where the occurrence took
place. The testimony of PW Shahab to the extent of motive part,
corroborate the testimony of complainant Mst. Musrat.

14. No doubt, PW Mst. Musarat is widow of the deceased,
who appeared as a solitary eyewitness, but it will not advance the
case of defence because general public in society, always feel
reluctant to depose against the culprits due to fear of earning
enmity etc. It is well established principle of law that testimony
of a witness which is trust worthy and inspiring confidence
cannot be discarded on mere ground of his close relation with the
deceased. A close relative, if proved to be the natural and truthful
witness of the occurrence, cannot be termed as interested witness.
Statement of a witness on account of being interested can only be
discarded if it is proved that he/she has ulterior motive on
account of enmity or any other consideration. No evidence

whatsoever has been brought by the defence to prove any enmity
11
LCr.A. Ne P01

or grudge of PW Mst. Musarat with the appellant. Reference in
this regard can be made to case titled, “Khizar Hayat Vs the
State”__(2011 SCMR_ 429). Thus, mere relationship of
complainant with the deceased would not detract her veracity, as
she had absolutely no motive of her own to involve the appellant
falsely by letting off the real culprit. Reliance in this regard can
be placed on the judgments of the august apex court in case,
titled, “Saeed Akhtar and others Vs the State” (2000 SCMR

383). In case titled, “Amal Sherin and another Vs the State

through A.G.” (PLD 2004 Supreme Court 371), the Hon’ble

Supreme Court while dilating upon the evidentiary value of

statement of related witnesses has ruled as under:-

“The trial Court was not justified to reject
eyewitness account furnished by complainant
Khan Amir PW and Hakim Gul PW merely on the
ground of being related and interested particularly
when appellants had not been able to establish on
record that the above mentioned witnesses had
nourished any grudge or ill will against them and
deposed with a specific motive”.

15. By now it is settled law that conviction can be recorded
on the testimony of a solitary eyewitness provided the solitary
eyewitness is true, trustworthy, confidence inspiring and his/her
testimony is corroborated by strong circumstantial evidence
because what is required by the court is the determination of
veracity and credibility of a witness and not the number and
relationship. For the Court, it is the quality and not the quantity of

the evidence which matters in criminal dispensation of justice. By
12
L.Cr.A. No.1185-P/201

virtue of Article 17 of the Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984, in
financial matters, two male or one male and two female
witnesses, have been made the requirement of law to prove the
financial obligations, whereas, in all other matters including
criminal, there is no such obligation, which clearly suggests that a
single witness is sufficient to prove a fact. Wisdom may be
derived from Zar Badadar’s case_(1978 SCMR 136), case
titled, “Muhammad Ahmad and another Vs _ the State and
others”(1997 SCMR 89), case titled, Muhammad Mansha Vs
the State” (2001 SCMR 199), case titled, “Dildar Hussain Vs
Muhammad _ Afzaal alias Chala_and 3 others” (PLD 2004
Supreme Court 663), case titled, “Farooq Khan Vs the State”
(2008 SCMR 917). From the above discussion, it is manifest that
the prosecution has successfully proved that the appellant has
committed murder of Hazir Zaman deceased on the day, date
time and place of occurrence with a 30 bore pistol as alleged by
the prosecution which has been substantiated through cogent and
confidence inspiring ocular evidence, corroborated by strong
circumstantial pieces of evidence and supported by medical
evidence. In this view of the matter, the learned trial Court while
appreciating the evidence in its true perspective has rightly held
the appellant guilty of the murder of Hazir Zaman deceased, to
which no exception can be taken.

16. Keeping in view the peculiar facts and circumstances of
the case, evident from the prosecution’s evidence, punishment

awarded to the appellant by the learned trial Court seems a bit
13
LCr.A. No,1185-P/2018

harsh. Admittedly, the appellant had not gone behind the
deceased for his murder. Had the complainant not visited the
house of the appellant for making complaint, the appellant may
not infuriated and the occurrence may not happened. The
occurrence has taken place at the spur of moment without
premeditation of the appellant. The appellant on the complaint of
the complainant in front of his family members got infuriated,
picked up his pistol and fired only one shot on the deceased with
which the deceased was hit on his left buttock. The appellant has
not repeated the act of firing. From the spot only one empty has
been shown recovered and as per autopsy report the deceased has
also sustained only solitary firearm entry wound. Keeping in
view the sudden mode of the incident without premeditation or
pre-planning on the part of the appellant, his case falls within the
Exception (4) of the previous section 300 PPC, which by that
time was punishable under section 304 PPC. For the sake of
convenience and ready reference Exception 4 of the then section
300 PPC is reproduced below:-

“Exception 4:-Culpable homicide is not murder
if it is committed without premeditation in a
sudden fight in the heat of passion upon sudden
quarrel and without the offender’s having taken
undue advantage or acted in cruel or unusual
manner.”

17. No doubt, neither old section 300 nor exceptions thereto
are available at present on the Statue book, however, it is laid

down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in case titled, “The State Vs

Muhammad Hanif and 05 others” (1992 SCMR 2047), that all
14
J.Cr.A. No.1185-P/2018

the matters which were initially dealt with by erstwhile section
304 PPC, are now to be considered under section 302 (c ) PPC.
The same view has been repeated upheld by the august apex
court in a number of cases.

18. Placing reliance on the judgment (supra) of the Hon’ble
Supreme Court, we convert the conviction of the appellant from
section 302(b) PPC to section 302 (c) PPC and reduce his
sentence from life imprisonment to ten years rigorous
imprisonment. The remaining sentence of the appellant and
benefit of section 382-B Cr.P.C. already extended to him, shall
remain intact.

19. With the above modification in the conviction and
sentence of the appellant, this appeal is hereby dismissed.

Announced: _—
03.02.2022

M.Sivaj Afridi PS

Spnior Puisne Judge

a
. JUDGE

DB of Mr. Justice Roob ul Amin Khan Hon’ ble Senior Puisne Judge; an
Hon’ble Mr, Justice Tiaz Anwar

