-l-
JUDGMENT SHEET
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, MINGORA

BENCH (DAR-UL-QAZA), SWAT
(Judicial Department)

J.Cr.A, No.49-M/2013
With Cr. M No. 93-M/2013

JUDGMENT
Date of hearing: 30.01.2018

Appellant:-_(Sadig-ur-Rahman) by M/S Wilayat_Ali
Khan and Rahim Ullah Chitrali, Advocates.

Respondent:- (The State) by Mr. Suliman Khan, State

counsel,

MOHAMMAD IBRAHIM KHAN, J.- The matter
came into existence upon lodging of the Mad No. 7 of
the daily diary dated 27.12.2009. Thereafter an inquiry
within the meaning of section 156 (iii) of the Code of
Criminal Procedure was initiated and in view whereof
the present accused/Appellant Sadiq-ur-Rahman and
one Sanaullah were apprehended. During the course of
inquiry proceedings, the accused in presence of
members of the inquiry team made pointation of the

ste of occurrence wherein the deceased Maqbool

Ahmad was pushed in the deep ravine (UU) the

approximate depth of which is 118 feet. Thereafter

Abdul Sabooh/ (D.B) Hon’ble Mr. Justice Mohammad Ibrahim Khan
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Ishtiag Ibrahim
oe 7

ls

they have taken out Rs. 3,000/- along with mobile from
corpus of deceased. The accused have also tried to
steal motorcycle belong to deceased Maqbool Ahmad
and later on his corpus was thrown in the river.
Subsequently, brother of the complainant Farid Ahmad
recorded his statement under section 164 Cr.P.C. and
charged the present accused/Appellant along with co-
accused Sanaullah for murder of his deceased brother
Magqbool Ahmad. On the basis of such asservations the
‘Murasila' was drafted followed by lodging of the First
Information Report.

2. The charge framed by the learned
Additional Sessions Judge/Izafi Zila Qazi Chitral on
08.03.2010 would divulge that the accused in
prosecution of their common intention on 27.12.2009

at midnight time in a place known as Koghezai

yo? Zarmarian Tak pushed the deceased Maqbool Ahmad

in the deep ravine, as a result of which he died there
and then, thereby, this offence is covered under section

302,34 PPC. Under the second head on the same date,

Nawab (D.B) Hon’ble Mr. Justice Mohammad Ibrahim Khan
Hon'ble Mr. Justice Ishtiag Ibrahim
=3 =

time and place, the accused have committed act of
disappearance of evidence within the meaning of
section 201 PPC. Likewise, under the 3rd head the
accused have been stood nominated for dishonest
misappropriation of the belongings of deceased,
thereby committed an offence under section 404 PPC.

3. When the accused/Appellant did not plead
his guilt, he claimed trial. Thus, in order to prove the
asservations against these accused, the prosecution
examined PW-1 Sultan Wazir SI, PW-2 Noor
Shahideen IHC, PW-3 Muhammad Afzal IHC No.
687, PW-4 Gul Khosh, PW-5 Jehanzeb HC No. 189,
PW-6 Zafar Ahmad SHO, PW-7 Akhtar Hussain
SI/Oii, PW-8 Muhammad Yahya Forest Guard, PW-9
Sardar, PW-10 Attaullah, PW-11 Atta-ur-Rahman
D IHC No. 105, PW-12 Imtiaz Ahmad, PW-13 Akbar
Khan, PW-14 Qurban Panah IHC, PW-15 Farid
Ahmad, PW-16 Dr. Samiullah Medical Officer
DHQ Hospital Chitral, who has conducted postmortem

of the deceased and PW-17 Abdul Ghaffar Khan

Nawab (D.B) Hon’ble Mr. Justice Mohammad Ibrahim Khan
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Ishtiaq Ibrahim
-4-

MOD/DDOR Mastuj who has recorded confessional

statements of the accused.

4. After the closure of prosecution evidence,
accused was examined under section 342 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, he negated his involvement in
the present episode.

5. In Sessions Case No. 17/2 of the year
2010, the learned Additional Sessions Judge/Izafi Zila
Qazi Chitral came up with its judgment dated
18.06.2011, whereby this accused-Appellant Sadiq-ur-
Rahman enmeshed in case FIR No. 01 dated
13.01.2010 charged under sections 302,404,201,34
PPC registered at Police Station Koghezai

was convicted and sentenced in the following manner:-

U/S 302 (b) PPC to life imprisonment

! yo) - along with compensation of Rs.
300,000/- within the meaning of section
544-A Cr.P.C payable to the Legal
Heirs of the deceased or in default
thereof shall further suffer one year RI.
However, benefit of Section 382-B
Cr.P.C was extended to _ the
accused/Appellant.

Nawab (D.B) Hon’ble Mr. Justice Mohammad Ibrahim Khan
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Ishtiaq Ibrahim
-5-

6. Here is this J.Cr.A No. 49-M/2013
preferred by the convict-Appellant Sadiq-ur-Rahman
looking forward for acceptance of prayer under the
grounds enumerated in the appeal and for his liberty
forever.

he Having heard arguments of learned
counsel for the accused/Appellant and learned State
counsel, record with their valuable assistance gone
through.

8. Leaving aside other merits of the case for
the time being, the only incriminating evidence in the
account of accused/Appellant is his retracted judicial
confession. As the accused/Appellant was arrested on
13.01.2010 whereas his confessional statement was

) recorded on 22.01.2010 i.e. after 8 days of his arrest,
\\

meaning thereby, that the accused/Appellant remained
in police custody for 8 days, so, the possibility of
procurement of confession through means of coercion,

inducement or torture cannot be ruled out.

Nawab (D.B) Hon’ble Mr. Justice Mohammad Ibrahim Khan
Hon'ble Mr. Justice Ishtiaq Ibrahim
eo

-6-

In such like situation, it has been

observed in many Judicial Pronouncements of the

Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan like 2017 SCMR

898 “Muhammad Ismail and others vs the State”. The

relevant citation (b) reads:-

Reappraisal of evidence. Judicial
confession before Magistrate, retraction
of---Effect. Judicial confession allegedly
made by _accused-persons/appellants
before a Magistrate under S. 164, Cr.P.C
had been retracted before the Trial Court
and in the absence of any independent
corroboration such retracted judicial
confession could not suffice all by itself
for recording or upholding the accused
persons' conviction. Convictions and
death sentences awarded to accused
persons were set aside in circumstances
and they were acquitted of the charge of

murder. Appeal was allowed accordingly.

Even otherwise, there is no cavil with this

legal proposition that while evaluating the confessional

yo statement the main object of law is to ensure its
voluntariness and truthfulness. It would be a right place

to mention here that a greater duty/responsibility has

been casted upon the Magistrate recording confession

to be satisfied that such confession is voluntarily made

Nawab (D,B) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Mohammad Ibrahim Khan
Hon'ble Mr. Justice Ishtiaq Ibrahim
-7-

and to that end he must make an inquiry before
recording the confession.

No doubt, conviction can be based on the
retracted confession alone but it is found voluntary,
true and confidence inspiring. It has been held by the

Honourable Supreme Court of Pakistan in case law

cited as “Bahadur Khan vs. The State” (PLD 1995 S
C 336) as under:-

“Retracted confession has to be
accepted only if it is corroborated by
clear, cogent and __ independent
evidence. Court is called upon to act
upon a retracted confession to enquire
into all the material points and
surrounding circumstances and satisfy
itself fully that the confession cannot

but be true”.

In view of the wisdom contained in the

esteem verdict of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of

hod Pakistan reported as 2005 SCMR 515 “Asif Mahmood
e—

vs the State”, wherein it has been opined:-

(a) Criminal Procedure Code (V of 1898)---

----S. 364---Penal Code (XLV of 1860),
Ss.302, 392 & 411--Appreciation of

evidence---Confession, when _ reliable---

Nawab (D.B) Hon’ble Mr, Justice Mohammad Ibrahim Khan
Hon'ble Mr. Justice Ishtiag Ibrahim
-8-

Principles--Confessional statement for
being relied upon should not only be true,
voluntary and believable but should be

without fear, favour or any inducement.

The confessional statement would lose its
evidentiary value and as such mere this confessional
statement would not stand as a sole reason for
conviction. Reliance has been placed on 2017 P_Cr.L J
479 “Noor Muhammad _& others vs the State &

others”:

(d) Penal Code (XLV of 1860)-—-

----Ss. 302 & 34---Qatl-i-amd, common
intention---Appreciation of evidence---
Benefit of doubt---Retracted confession---
Accused was charged for the murder of
deceased---Accused made confession
before Judicial Magistrate but later on
retracted---Retracted confession of the
accused was not corroborated by any
evidence---Circumstances suggested that
confessional statement retracted by the
accused person, could not at all be called
as voluntary judicial confession in the eye
ro of law and the same had no legal effect---
Conviction and sentence recorded by Trial

Court were set aside in circumstances.

In such scenario, when the
accused/Appellant admittedly remained in police

custody for 8 days, so, the confession might have been

Nawab (D.B) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Mohammad Ibrahim Khan
Hon'ble Mr. Justice Ishtiaq Ibrahim
-9-

obtained from him by the police through coercion,
inducement or torture therefore, such confession
deserves little consideration and is discarded
accordingly.

9. It is an admitted fact on record that the
occurrence occurred during dark hours of the night
and in all probabilities this is an unseen and un-
witnessed crime. Reliance can be placed on 2017 YLR
436 “Talib Hussain _& another_vs_the State &

another”:

(b) Criminal trial---

---Ocular testimony, disbelieved---Effect---
When ocular testimony was disbelieved
then recovery as well as medical evidence

were of no help to prosecution.
(c) Criminal trial---

---Onus of establishing case---Prosecution

had to establish its own case independently
» instead of depending upon weaknesses of
\ us

eo defence.

(e) Penal Code (XLV of 1860)---

----§.302---Criminal Procedure Code (V of
1898), §.342---Qatl-i-amd---Admission of
guilt by accused---Prosecution failing to
prove case---Effect---Where prosecution

had failed to prove its case against accused

Nawab (D.B) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Mohammad Ibrahim Khan
Hon'ble Mr. Justice Ishtiaq Ibrahim
=

“10s

beyond reasonable doubt, accused might be
acquitted even if he had taken plea and
admitted killing the deceased.

10. It is recognized principle of criminal
administration of justice that when there is no direct or
ocular evidence in field circumstantial or for that
matter last seen evidence has to be evaluated with great
care and caution, as there is every possibility of
misleading especially in this part of the country where
the people do make rumours in respect of certain
incident occurred in the locality which sometime
transformed into shape of last seen evidence having no
relevancy whatsoever with the actual happening which
too occurred during dark hours of the night . In present
case, exculpatory confession of the accused/Appellant
on all counts is not in consonance with the recoveries

and evidence put-forth by the prosecution in shape

statements of the prosecution witnesses, thus, same is
of no use in respect of maintaining of the conviction

and sentence awarded to the accused/Appellant.

Nawab (D.B) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Mohammad Ibrahim Khan
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Ishtiag Ibrahim
|
oc

-ll-

11. Whereas the factum of benefit of doubt is
very much lucid in its entirety that if there exist a
reasonable ground to believe that the
accused/Appellant has not participated in the
commission of alleged crime in the mode and manner
as advanced by the prosecution then there is no need of
numbers of circumstances to prove the innocence of
accused even a single circumstance creating reasonable
doubt is sufficient for the acquittal of the accused. In
this regard guidance is derived from the judgment cited
as 2015 P Cr.LJ 554 (Peshawar) “ Sahibzada vs the
State and 2 others”.

12. In the above prevailing situation, we after
reappraisal of entire evidence are of the firm view that
the prosecution case against the accused/ Appellant has

not been proved beyond reasonable doubt and the

~~ judgment of learned trial Court is based on wrong

appreciation of evidence and the law on the subject.
Hence, we accept this appeal and set-aside the

impugned judgment of conviction rendered by the

Nawab (D.B) Hon’ble Mr, Justice Mohammad Ibrahim Khan
Hon'ble Mr, Justice Ishtiaq Ibrahim
-12-

learned Trial Court. Ergo, the accused/Appellant is
acquitted of the charges leveled against him. He is
in custody and be set free if not required in any
other case.
13. These are the reasons of our short order
announced in open Court on even date.
14. Before parting with this judgment, it is
pertinent to mention here that the
accused/Appellant has also preferred Criminal
Miscellaneous Application bearing No. 93-M of
2013 through Superintendent Haripur Prison for
condonation of delay in respect of filing of jail
criminal appeal before this Court.

Since the reason advanced therein is

genuine as Appellant being a poor person could not

1 stor services of private standing counsel,

therefore, he was not in a position to submit the
appeal against his conviction within time. Hence,

this petition is allowed and the delay occurred

Nawab (D.B) Hon’ble Mr. Justice Mohammad Ibrahim Khan
Hon'ble Mr. Justice Ishtiag Ibrahim
-13-

during filing of this criminal jail appeal before this

Court is hereby condoned.
por.
Announced. a
Dt: 30.01.2018 JUDG
GE

Hon’ble Mr. Justice Mohammad Ibrahim Khan

Nawab (D.B)
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Ishtiaq Ibrahim
