JUDGMENT SHEET
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
MINGORA BENCH (DAR-UL-QAZA), SWAT
(Judicial Department)

JCr. A No, 76-M/2021

(slam Wali Wess The State)

Present: MSS Hazrat Rahman and Aurangzeb, Advocates for appellant.

Mr. Saeed Ahmad, Assistant A.G. for State.

Date of hearing: 15.02.2023
JUDGMENT

MUHAMMAD NAEEM ANWAR, J.- This appeal has been
preferred by appellant convict Islam Wali son of Hazrat
Wali through Superintendent Central Prison Mardan,
assailing the judgment of the learned Additional Sessions
Judge Samarbagh Camp Court at Lal Qilla, dated
15.02.2021 rendered in case FIR No. 49 dated 28.04.2019
u/s 302 PPC of P.S Lal Qilla, District Lower Dir, whereby
he was convicted u/s 302(b) PPC on the charge of
committing murder of his brother Jamil-ur-Rahman and
sentenced to undergo life imprisonment as Tazir. In
addition, he was also burdened to pay Rs.200,000/- as
compensation to LRs of deceased in terms of section 544-A,
Cr.P.C or to suffer six months S.I in case he defaults in
payment of compensation. Benefit of section 382-B, Cr.P.C

was extended to him.

Tajamul/Cs* DB: Hon'ble Mr, Justice Muhammad Naeem Anwar
u J m1

2. Complainant Alamzeb (PW-2), who had brought
dead body of his brother Jamil (later on corrected as Jamil-
ur-Rahman) to civil hospital Lal Qilla on 28.04.2019,
reported to police at 09:15 hours that on the same day he
was present in front of the deceased’s shop while the
deceased himself was inside his shop; in the meanwhile at
08:30 hours his brother Islam Wali (appellant) came there,
drew out a pistol from his trouser-fold and fired two shots at
the deceased whereby he got hit on his chest and abdomen.
He died in the way when he was being carried to hospital
Lal Qilla for medical treatment. Complainant, while
disclosing the motive behind the occurrence as land dispute,
claimed that he, his brother Ahmad Wali (PW-4) and
Momin Khan (not produced) had witnessed the occurrence.

3. On the above report of complainant, SHO Shah
Faisal Khan §.I (PW-1) drafted Murasila and sent the same
to P.S where FIR referred to above was registered against
the appellant. After preparation of injury sheet and inquest
report of the deceased, the dead body was examined by Dr.
Syed Munib-ur-Rahman M.O (PW-7) who recorded his
findings in his reports Ex.PW-7/1 to Ex.PW-7/3, the detail

of which is as under:

Q.1. No charring marks present.
Q: Beyond close range
o_Date and time: 28 April 2019, 09:20 AM

Tajamulcst| bB: Hon'ble Mr. Justice Muhanumad Naeem Anwar
Hon'ble Mr, Justice Muhammad Iaz Khan:
Place of examination: Emergency Room Cat: “D”
hospital Lal Qilla.

Name: Jamil s/o Hazrat Wali. Sex: Male, Address:
Raidgai, Maidan.

Brought in and body identified by: Ahmad Wali s/o
Hazrat Wali (NIC No. 15302-4563215-5).

I examined the dead body of Jamil s/o Hazrat Wali R/O
Raidgai Maidan by the request of SHO, P.S Lal Qilla. His
age was 45/46 years.

The dead body mentioned above was having the following
injuries.

1)

2)

3)

An entry wound on the front, chest of the body circular
in shape, regular and inverted margins, clotted blood
on the wound margins about 1/2" _x1/2" inches size
present in the left 3 intercostal space left to
parasternal line."

While exit wound present on the back side of the
body irregular in shape, with everted margins, size
about 1x1" traces of blood oozing out from wound.
Present on the right side below the inferior border of
the sight scapula.

An entry wound on front of the body, circular in shape,
regular, and inverted margins, about 1/2" x 1/2” size,
clotted blood on the margins and around the wound the
epigastric region, left to the mid line, below the
xiphoid of the sternum.

While exit wound present on the posterior aspect of
the body (back) with irregular shape, everted margins
about 1 4" in the sight lumbar regions, right to the 3rd
Lumbar vertebra and above the iliac crest. Traces of
blood oozing out of the wound.

An entry wound present on the dorsal aspect on the
left-hand little finger, distal inter phalangeal joint,
circular in shape inverted edges about 1.0 cm in
diameter.

While exit wound present on the left-hand little
finger, palmar aspect on the distal interphalangeal joint
irregular in shape, everted edges, about 1.5 cm size,
with no active bleeding.

Kind of Weapons used FAI

Cause of death: FAI to the vital of Organs.

Time since death: Probably 30 to 45 mins.

))
2)
3)

Injury sheet.
Out Patient department slip.

Postmortem report handed over to police Shah Zamin
Khan ASI, investigations.

Talamul/es*

08: Hon’ble Mr, Justice Muhammad Naeem Anwar

Hon’hle Mr. Justice Muhammed Uae Khan
4 The appellant was arrested on 29.04.2019, the
following day of the occurrence. After completion of
investigation, final report was submitted against him before
the Court for his trial on commencement of which he was
formally indicted for the offence but he denied the allegation
and opted to face trial. Prosecution produced and examined
08 PWs in support of its case against the appellant
whereafter he was examined u/s 342, Cr.P.C during which
he once again professed innocence, however, he neither
recorded his own statement on oath in terms of section
340(2), Cr.P.C., nor produced any witness in his defence.
On conclusion of trial, the learned trial Court found him
guilty of the charge, and sentenced him through the
impugned judgment in the manner already mentioned above,
hence, instant appeal.

5. Arguments heard and record perused.

6. First of all, Cr.Misc. No. 109-M/2021 for
condonation of delay sent by appellant alongwith the main
appeal requires disposal. The record shows that the
impugned judgment was passed on 15.02.2021 while the
instant appeal was received in the Institution Branch of this
Court on 12.03.2021, as such, the appeal has been filed

within the stipulated time of 60 days under Article 155 of

Tojamul/cs+| OB: Hon‘ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Naeem Anwar
ble Mr. if jhamma: Khan
the Limitation Act, 1908 as well as under Paragraph 10(8) of
the Sharia Nizam-e-Ad] Regulation, 2009 which provides
maximum time of 30 days for filing of appeal. Thus, the
application, being misconceived, is disposed of accordingly.

Zz The present appellant has been charged for murder
of his brother Jamil-ur-Rahman. It is the version of
prosecution that he entered the shop of deceased on
28.04.2019 at 08:30 A.M and fired two shots at him as result
whereof he sustained injuries on his chest, abdomen and
little finger of his left hand. He was put in a vehicle in
injured condition for taking him to civil hospital Lal Qilla
but he succumbed to the injuries, as such, he was received
dead in the hospital. Before discussion on ocular account
and circumstantial evidence on record, the mode and manner
of reporting the matter to local police needs consideration of
this Court. As per contents of FIR, the occurrence was
reported by complainant Alamzeb in civil hospital Lal Qilla
on the same day at 09:15 hours which was recorded in shape
of Murasila (Ex.PA/1) drafted by SHO Shah Faisal Khan S.1
(PW-1). When appeared in the witness box, he exhibited
Murasila, injury sheet and inquest report of the deceased as
well as the memo regarding handing over of the dead body
to his relatives but he admitted in his cross-examination that

he himself had not prepared the documents rather ASI Aziz-

Tajamuljcs*| DB: Hon'ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Naeem Anwar
ur-Rahman had prepared the same on his dictation.
Prosecution has not examined ASI Aziz-ur-Rahman before
the Court to verify preparation of the exhibited documents
on the dictation of SHO. The version of SHO with regard to
lodging of the report in hospital was categorically belied by
complainant who stated in his examination-in-chief that
local police had drafted Murasila on the spot which was
read over to him and thereafter he impressed his thumb
thereon. Ahmad Wali (PW-4) stated in his examination-in-
chief that after the occurrence, he put the injured in a
vehicle, took him to hospital where the doctor declared him
dead whereafter he brought back the dead body to house of
the deceased. This witness has not uttered a single word in
his examination-in-chief with regard to lodging of the report
by complainant either on the spot or in hospital or
preparation of the injury sheet and inquest report by police
that where those documents were prepared or when post-
mortem on the dead body was conducted. Three important
witnesses of prosecution have narrated the mode and
manner of report in quite different ways, as such, the status
of Murasila at the instance of complainant Alamzeb has
become suspicious. Similarly, the inquest report and injury
sheet have also lost their evidentiary value because it cannot

be ascertained from the evidence on record that when and

Tapmures>| DB: Hon'ble Mr, Justice Muhammad Naeem Anwar
Hon’bts Mie Justice Muhammad tla2 Khan
where the mentioned documents were prepared by police.
No doubt, generally FIR by itself has not been considered by
superior Courts as a substantive piece of evidence as the
only purpose of this document is to set the law in motion but
it does not mean that FIR should be kept out of
consideration at all. The Hon’ble Supreme Court, while
highlighting significance of FIR in the case of “Iftikhar

Hussain and others Vs. The State” (2004 SCMR 1185),

observed that FIR has got a significant role to play, as the
same is a corner stone of the prosecution case to establish
guilt of the accused involved in the crime. Further held that
any doubt in lodging of FIR and commencement of
investigation gives rise to a benefit in favour of accused. In
another judgment in the case of “Subhan Khan and others
Vs, The State” (PLD 1960 (W.P) Lahore 1), it was held
that when the story in FIR, which is the basic version of
prosecution, is modified by complainant, discovery of the
real facts becomes more difficult for the Courts. Same
situation emerges in the present case in light of the divergent
versions of the PWs regarding one and the same fact, the
ultimate impact of which is that it has rendered the entire
case of prosecution highly doubtful qua the mode and
manner of the occurrence. If the version of SHO is admitted

as correct even then he has recorded a self-contradictory

Tafamuycs¢| DB: Hon'ble Mr, Justice Muhammad Naeem Anwar
‘bi hari
statement suggesting concealment of real facts on his part.
In his cross-examination, at one stage he denied his visit to
spot on the day of occurrence stating that he had not seen
the place of occurrence on the same day but in the same
breath took a U-turn from his earlier statement and narrated
that he had visited the spot afterwards, however, being not
an investigating officer of the case, there was no
Justification of his visit to spot on the same day more
particularly when roznamchas with regard to his departure
and return to P.S are not available on record. Thus, the
foundation on which the prosecution has based its case
against the appellant is weak and unstable from the very
inception, as such, the benefit of doubt arising from the
above stated position of the prosecution case can safely be
extended to appellant.

8. Complainant narrated in FIR that he as well as
Ahmad Wali and Momin Khan had witnessed the
occurrence. Complainant appeared in the witness box as
PW-2 and reiterated the contents of FIR claiming that he
and his brother Ahmad Wali had witnessed the occurrence,
however, he skipped the name of Momin Khan contrary to
his earlier version in the FIR. It is noteworthy that though
Point No.5 was assigned to Momin Khan in the site plan but

his name was not included in the calendar of witnesses

Tajamut/cs+| DB: Hon'ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Naeem Anwar

which manifests the intention of Investigating Officer for his
non-examination during the trial proceedings. Although
prosecution is at liberty to produce witnesses of its choice
and is not bound to examine all the witnesses mentioned in
the calendar of witnesses as observed by august Supreme
Court in the case of “Mandoos Khan VA. The State” 2003
SCMR 884 that prosecution must produce best kind of
evidence to establish accusation against accused facing trial
but simultaneously it has no obligation to produce a good
number of witnesses because it has an option to produce as
many as witnesses which in its consideration are sufficient
to bring home guilt against the accused but in the present
case the situation is altogether different. PW Momin Khan,
who was an important and impartial witness of the
occurrence was associated with the process of investigation
but he was willfully kept out of the list of prosecution
witnesses and no reason was mentioned by I.O for the said
omission. Abandoning of a witness mentioned in the
calendar of witnesses is, no doubt, the choice of prosecution
but the reason for non-inclusion of a witness duly named in
the FIR and associated with the process of investigation
should have been explained by prosecution in plausible
terms. Thus, best evidence was withheld by prosecution

which leads us to draw an adverse inference in terms of

Tajamul/cs+| DB: Hon'ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Naeem Anwar

on‘ble Me, Justice Muhaviimad lier Khan
-10-

Article 129(g) of the Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984 that
PW Momin Khan, being an independent witness of the
occurrence, wanted to disclose real facts of the occurrence
before the trial Court but his truthful account was not
supporting the version of prosecution as brought forth on the
record, therefore, his name was not mentioned in the
calendar of witnesses. Guidance is sought from

“Muhammad Rafique_and_others Vs. The State and

others” (2010 SCMR 385).

9. Adverting back to the statement of complainant
Alamzeb (PW-2) who narrated in his report as well as in his
examination-in-chief that he was present in front of the
deceased’s shop when the appellant came there and fired at
deceased who was sitting in a chair inside his grocery shop.
Admittedly, house of complainant was at a distance of 400
yards from the place of occurrence, therefore, prosecution
was bound to show some credible reason for his presence in
front of the deceased’s shop at the time of occurrence,
however, neither any such reason was shown by
complainant nor any evidence is available on record to
justify his presence on the spot at the relevant time.
Although he voluntarily stated in his cross-examination that
he was running a shop near the shop of deceased but he has

introduced this fact for the first time during his cross-

Tajamul/cs+| DB: Hon’ble Mr, Justice Muhammad Naeem Anwar

Hon'ble Mr. Justice Muhammad liar Khan
-li-

examination. A fact not disclosed by a witness in his
statement u/s 161/164, Cr.P.C or in FIR, if he is
complainant, but introduces the same voluntarily for the first
time during his cross-examination, would amount to
dishonest improvement on his part if same has probative
value, hence, such portion of the witness’s statement can
safely be kept out of consideration. Even otherwise,
complainant is serving as Class-IV in a primary school and
his stance regarding his own shop near the place of
occurrence is nothing more than his bald assertion because
neither the I.O has shown any shop of the complainant near
the shop of deceased in the site plan nor any other witness
has supported him qua his above assertion. His presence on
the spot also appears doubtful in view of his unusual and
unnatural conduct. Though he claims to have accompanied
the deceased to hospital but his name has not been
mentioned as identifier of the dead body in the inquest
report or post-mortem report. This omission casts serious

doubts about the presence of complainant at the spot.

Wisdom is drawn from “Mst. Sughra Begum and another
Vs. The State” (2015 SCMR 1142). Even PW Ahmad Wali,
whose name appears in the inquest and postmortem reports
as identifier of deceased, has not uttered a single word with

regard to presence of the complainant on the spot at the time

Taamul/cs*| DB: ——_Hon’ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Naeem Anwar
Hon'ble Mic: Justice Muhammad liaz Khan
-12-

of occurrence. Thus, keeping in view the distance between
the house of complainant and shop of deceased where he
was done to death, non-mentioning of his name in the
inquest and post-mortem reports and inconformity of other
circumstantial evidence with his version of seeing the
appellant firing at the deceased, we do not think it safe to
rely upon his testimony which neither rings true nor inspires

confidence.

10. Ahmad Wali, whose name has been mentioned as
eye-witness of the occurrence in the FIR, appeared in the
witness box as PW-4 and stated in his examination-in-chief
that a mosque was situated at a distance of 20/25 paces from
the shop of deceased where he was present. On hearing two
fire shots, he came and saw the appellant coming out of the
deceased’s shop; he asked him as to whether he has killed
his brother, in reply he said ‘no’ and kept on walking. As
pointed out earlier, this witness while recording his
examination-in-chief, has not uttered even a single word
regarding presence of complainant on the spot. If the
complainant was present there at the time of firing, he would
have mentioned the natural reaction of PW Ahmad Wali
soon after the occurrence and likewise Ahmad Wali would
have also explained natural behavior of the complainant as

can be expected from a person of ordinary prudence in such

Tepmuycs+| OB: Hon’ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Nacem Anwar
a
-13-

like alarming situation. The appellant, deceased and both the
PWs are brothers inter se, hence, the statements of both the
witnesses should contain common narrations showing their
Joint actions at the relevant time towards the appellant as
well as deceased, however, the statements of eye-witnesses
show that they have acted independently at the time of
occurrence against the normal course of business at such
occasions. The overall scenario presented by the eye-
witnesses in their respective statements indicates that they
were unaware of each other, which was not possible in the
circumstances presented by prosecution. The mentioned
state of affairs leads us to the irresistible conclusion that
neither complainant nor his brother Ahmad Wali was
present on the spot at the time of occurrence otherwise they
would have confirmed the demeanor of each other they had
exhibited at the time of occurrence. It means that a false
story was subsequently cooked up which on the face of it is
unnatural and unbelievable. If viewed from another angle,
the statement of PW Ahmad Wali clearly shows that he had
not seen the appellant firing at the deceased rather he stated
that he had seen the appellant coming out of the shop of
deceased after the firing. In cross-examination he admitted
in unambiguous terms that he had seen no one firing at the

deceased. The most important aspect of the testimony of PW

Tajamutscs*| oB: Hon'ble Mr, Justice Muhammad Naeem Anwar
Hon'ble Mr, Justice Muhammad Jiaz Khan
-14-

Ahmad Wali is that, from the very beginning of the case, he
was presented as eye-witness of the occurrence, therefore,
the fair and just course for the learned trial Court was to
accept or reject his testimony as eye-witness of the
occurrence. In other words, status of a witness as mentioned
in FIR cannot be changed afterwards for example if
prosecution shows a witness as last seen evidence in the
FIR, then his testimony is required to be considered in the
same line and not otherwise. In the present case, PW Ahmad
Wali was shown as eye-witness of the occurrence in the FIR
and he was shown at Point-4 in the site plan at a distance of
16 feet from deceased whereas complainant was shown at a
distance of 14 feet from him, as such, according to site plan
the distance between complainant and PW Ahmad Wali was
only two feet. PW Ahmad Wali was unable to establish his
status as eye-witness of the occurrence rather he had seen no
person at all firing at the deceased, therefore, his testimony
was liable to rejection being doubtful but the learned trial
Court has considered his statement against the appellant
under the principle of res gestae by holding that he had seen
the appellant coming out of the deceased’s shop soon after
the firing, which was neither the version of prosecution in
FIR or in site plan nor the attending facts and circumstances

of the case suggest that he had seen the appellant at the time

Tajsmut/cs| OB: Hon'ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Naeem Anwar
-15-

of leaving the shop of deceased after the firing. In this
respect, a few lines of his cross-examination are worth

perusal,
Brrr LeU RAL LUO MO Rr Lie
-< Oh tov test SdidbecWhtiSecny

It is a matter of general observation that a person,
after making firing upon another person, naturally tries to
decamp from the spot as soon as possible but same
phenomenon does not appear in the present case. Not only
there was an intervening Masjid between the shop of
deceased and the place of presence of PW Ahmad Wali in
view whereof his version of seeing the appellant coming out
from the shop of deceased is repellent to reason but on the
other hand the PW has alleged that he had questioned the
appellant with regard to murder of his brother. It is not
believable that the appellant, after his alleged firing at the
deceased, had stayed inside the shop till arrival of the
witness. It is also astonishing that the PW has not mentioned
" the name of even a single other individual to have attracted
to spot soon after the firing as per usual practice of people in
such like situation, though many shops had been shown in
the site plan opposite to the shop of deceased. Admittedly,
the appellant, who is brother of the deceased and eye-

witnesses, was residing at Peshawar alongwith his family. If

Tapmuics+| oB: Hon’‘ble Mr, Justice Muhammad Naeem Anwar

Hon‘hie Mr. Justice Moharimad Iisa Khao

-16-

the appellant was not in good terms with his brothers
because of land dispute per version of prosecution, then his
alleged entry inside the shop of deceased was definitely a
signal of alarm, in such situation, both the eye-witnesses
were required either to protect the deceased or apprehend
the appellant if he had already succeeded in targeting the
deceased, but no such effort appears on behalf of the eye-
witnesses in the entire evidence. It is not the version of PW
Ahmad Wali that he had seen any weapon with the appellant
at the time of his exit from the shop of deceased, hence, his
apprehension by both the PWs was not a difficult task.
Insofar as the testimony of widow of deceased is concerned,
admittedly she is not an eye-witness of the occurrence rather
she claimed to have seen the appellant fleeing from the spot
after the firing. Complainant and PW Ahmad Wali have also
not mentioned arrival of widow of deceased to spot soon
after the occurrence just like they have not confirmed the
presence of each other in their respective statements. She
and her son were examined by I.0 after two days of the
occurrence, which suggests that their introduction as
witnesses of lastly seeing the appellant running from the
spot was after thought and result of consultation and
deliberation, therefore, their testimony is of no avail to

prosecution.

Taemutics*| DB: Hon’bte Mr. tustice Muhammad Naeem Anwar
-17-

il. The learned trial Court, while believing presence
of the appellant on the spot at the time of occurrence, mainly
relied upon an application purportedly sent by appellant
from jail, which is available at page 80 of the requisitioned
record, According to contents of said application, the
appellant had come to Samarbagh from Peshawar for
visiting his ailing mother-in-law; after staying overnight in
the house of his brother-in-law, the next morning he
proceeded to village Qamar Kotkay for receiving
outstanding amount from one Gul Khan but his phone was
going off, as such, he returned to Peshawar. Perusal of the
application shows that not only it is an unattested photocopy
but it also does not bear signature or stamp of Superintend
Jail. In addition, the application has not been put to
appellant during his examination w/s 342, Cr.P.C, therefore,
the mentioned document had no evidentiary value. Thus, the
learned trial Court has committed an illegality while
considering the application against the appellant in the
mentioned circumstances. The law is settled by now that if
any incriminating piece of evidence is not put to accused in
his statement under §.342, Cr.P.C. for his explanation, then
the same cannot be used against him for his conviction.

Guidance is sought from “Muhammad Sadique Vs. The

Tajamui/cs* DB: Hon’ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Naeem Anwar

Hon'ble Mr. Justice Muhammad iiaz Khan
-18-

State” (2018 SCMR 71) and “Muhammad Shah Vs. The

State” (2010 SCMR 1009).

12, _ As regards medical evidence, though it is an
undeniable fact that deceased had met an unnatural death as
result of firearm injuries but whether medical evidence in
the present case is in line with the version of prosecution, if
yes, whether conviction of the appellant could be recorded
solely on the basis of medical evidence when we have
already disbelieved the ocular account. Above are the
important questions which need resolution by this Court. It
is the version of prosecution as per contents of FIR and
statements of the PWs that appellant had fired two shots at
the deceased but according to MLR Ex.PW-7/1 furnished by
Dr. Syed Munib-ur-Rahman (PW-7) the deceased has
sustained three firearm entry wounds with corresponding
exit wounds on his body; one entry wound was found on the
chest of the dead body, the second entry wound on the front
of the body in epigastric region while the third wound was
found on the dorsal aspect of the left hand little finger. Thus,
the number of fire shots as mentioned by PWs does not
commensurate with the number of wounds on the body of
deceased. Prosecution has not explained that how the third

injury was caused to the deceased. In almost similar

situation in the case of “Muhammad Arif Vs, The State”

Tajamul/cs*| DB: Hon'ble Mr, Justice Muhammad Naeem Anwar
Hon'ble Me, justice Muhammad lai Khan
-19-

(2019 SCMR 631), the Hon’ble Supreme Court observed.

that:

“Dr. Iftikhar Ahmad (PW2) conducted postmortem
examination on the dead body of deceased Javaid
Hussain, He (PW2) stated in his cross-examination stated
that there was only one injury in the MLC; that it was
only the entry wound and that no exit wound was
observed. However, in the post-mortem examination
report two firearm injuries (injury No.1 4 cm x 2 cm and
injury No.1 em x 1/2 cm) were observed. There is no
explanation whatsoever as to how the second injury was
inflicted on the person of Javaid Hussain (deceased)”.

The learned trial Court has resolved the above
disparity by holding that left hand of the deceased might be
on his chest or epigastric region having sit in a chair due to
human reflex defense mechanism; the projectile had
penetrated the little finger and the chest, most probably the
epigastric region thus creating two entry and corresponding
exit wounds simultaneously. In absence of any evidence to
prove that in what manner the deceased had responded to
firing of assailant, it cannot be concluded on the basis of
conjectures and probabilities that the deceased might have
placed his left hand on his chest or epigastric region under
the human reflex defense mechanism. Wisdom is drawn
from “Naveed Asghar and others Vs. The State” (PLD
2021 S.C 600) wherein the Hon’ble apex Court observed
that accused person could not be convicted on the basis of

mere suspicion or probability unless and until the charge

Tajamul/cs*| DB: Hon’ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Naeem Anwar
-20-

against him was proved beyond reasonable doubt. It is a
matter of general observation that a person apprehending
attack from another person commonly tries to protect his
head and face by covering the same with his hands in reflex
action, however, neither this rule nor the observations of the
learned trial Court are universally applicable rather it
depends upon the facts and circumstances of each case that
how the deceased or victim had responded to firing of the
accused. Sometimes the victim also makes an attack on the
assailant in his defence and sometimes, as a lost option, ties
to run for saving his life or hides himself behind something.
In order to determine that in what manner the deceased had
reacted to the firing of assailant or what was the position of
his forearms immediately before firing or attack upon him
with some other object, evidence was required to be brought
to this effect for consideration of the Court. In absence of
evidence, any conclusion drawn by the Court on the basis of
speculation and presumption with regard to existence or
non-existence of a particular fact is not sustainable. Perusal
of the medical report further shows that dimension of inlet
wounds No.1 & 2 was % x % inches whereas inlet wound
No.3 on little finger of left hand of the deceased at distal
inter-phalangeal joint was 01 cm in diameter. On

comparison of dimensions of inlet wounds No. 1 & 2 with

Tajemuycs*| OB: Hon’ble Mr, Justice Muhammad Naeem Anwar

Hon‘ble Mr, Justice Muhaminag (jaz Khan
-21-

wound No.3 on the body of deceased, the difference invites
the attention of prudent and curious mind. If it be presumed
that inlet injury No.3 and one of inlet injuries No.1 & 2 had
been caused with the same bullet, in that eventuality same
dimension of inlet wounds No. | & 2 was not possible due
to change in velocity of the bullet because of the intervening
finger. Thus, the fair conclusion, which can be drawn from
the different dimensions of the inlet wounds on the person
of deceased, would be that three fire shots had been caused
with two different weapons suggesting participation of two
assailants in the occurrence, which was not the version of
prosecution in the FIR as well as statements of the eye-
witnesses. Thus, another conflict is emerging between the
ocular account and medical evidence. In addition, in the site
plan, which was prepared on pointation of the eye-
witnesses, the distance between the appellant and deceased
has been shown about 3% feet but no charring marks were
found by doctor on the wounds of deceased. The Hon’ble
Supreme Court has held in the case titled “Barkat Ali Vs.
Muhammad Asif and others” (2007 SCMR 1812) that
blackening would appear in case deceased received injuries
from a distance of four (4) feet. Same view appears in the

case of “Mian Sohail Ahmad and others Vs. The State and

others” (2019 SCMR 956). On the mentioned ground too,

tapmuyese| DE: Hon'ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Naeem Anwar

-22-

medical evidence in the present case is not in conformity
with ocular account. Benefit of the aforementioned conflicts
can be extended to appellant. Reliance is placed on

“Mansab_ Ali V/s, The State” (2019 SCMR 1306) and

“Muhammad Aslam V/s. Muhammad Shafique and 3
others” (2005 SCMR 1507). When the ocular account in

the present case by itself is not worth credence being
doubtful and same is also not supported by medical
evidence, conviction of the appellant cannot be sustained on
the sole ground that deceased had died because of sustaining
firearm injuries on his person. It is settled law that medical
evidence by itself cannot identify the accused and it can
only prove the seat and nature of injuries, the cause of death,
type of weapon etc. but such evidence cannot be considered
in isolation for conviction of accused in absence of
trustworthy ocular account or circumstantial evidence of
convincing nature forming an unbroken chain to connect the
accused with murder of deceased, which is not available in
the present case. Reliance is placed on “Altaf Hussain Vs.
Fakhar Hussain and another” (2008 SCMR 1103) and

“Muhammad _ Ashraf and_others Vs. The State” (1998
SCMR 279).

13. Adverting to incriminating recoveries, 1.0 has

recovered two bullets, one crime empty of 30 bore pistol

Tajamul/cs*| DB: Hon‘ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Naeem Anwar

nb t ad li
-23-

from the spot and a blood-stained piece of cushion placed on
the chair of deceased besides his blood-stained shirt was
also taken into possession. 1.O has also claimed recovery of
crime weapon pistol and 03 live cartridges on pointation of
the appellant. According to contents of recovery memo
Ex.PW-6/4 prepared on 01.05.2019, appellant disclosed
before police that after committing murder of deceased in
his shop, he was walking on the bank of Maidan Khwar
(stream); for relaxing himself, he sat in a place and unloaded
the remaining three rounds from magazine of the pistol by
throwing them there whereafter he proceeded ahead and
threw the pistol into a field of maize crop. The story
narrated in the recovery memo does not appeal to prudent
mind because when the appellant, as per prosecution
version, had made his mind to throw the pistol into a field,
there was no need for him to unload the same. It is
astonishing that the pistol was not sealed in the parcel on the
same day on the sole pretext that it was to be examined by
Armorer. On the following day i.e., 02.05.2019, the pistol
was sealed in parcel without examination thereof by
Armorer mentioning the reason that Armorer was busy in
some official work. This explanation on behalf of I.O is not
believable being absurd. The purpose of sealing the case

property in parcels on the spot is to avoid manipulation or

Tajamul/cs*| o8: Hon'ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Naeem Anwar

Hon'ble Mr, Justice Muhammad IlazKhary
ele ses ae teett we et gah

-24-

tampering thereof by someone else and to ensure its
uninterrupted dispatch to Forensic Lab for opinion of the
expert. Delayed sealing of case property without plausible
reason casts a doubt on its genuineness, hence, such
recovery is of no avail to prosecution. Thus, the 1.0 was
required to have kept the pistol in a sealed parcel on the spot
in presence of witnesses. Even otherwise, there was no need
of examination of the pistol through Armorer because one
crime empty had already been recovered from the spot,
hence, the best and proper course for the I.O was to send the
pistol along with the recovered empty and bullets
straightaway to FSL for opinion of Ballistic Expert. The
record further shows that the parcels containing the pistol
and crime empty with bullets were handed over to Muharrir
Amjad Ali (PW-5) on 03.05.2019 though the empty and
bullets had been recovered from the spot on 28.04.2019
whereas the pistol had been sealed on 02.05.2019. It is
evident from receipts available on file that PW-5 had sent
the parcels to FSL on the same date i.e., 03.05.2019 which
means that the parcels had never been kept in Malkhana of
the P.S for the purpose of its safe custody. Prosecution has
not explained that where the parcels were kept during the
intervening period, as such, safe custody of the parcels was

compromised in the present case. Thus, the recovery of

Telamuycs*| oe: Hon'ble Mr, Justice Muhammad Naeem Anwar
-25-

pistol, being highly doubtful, cannot be used against the
appellant. In addition, FSL report qua the empty and pistol
is not available on record. The Investigating Officer has not
offered any explanation that despite the empty and pistol
had been sent to FSL for opinion of the expert then for what
reason the same was not procured from the Forensic Lab. It
appears that the report was not supporting the prosecution
version, therefore, the same was willfully retained by police
instead of placing the same on file. In absence of FSL
report, the alleged recovery of pistol on pointation of the
appellant, especially when the chain of safe custody thereof
is broken, cannot be proved. Rel: “Ali Murad alias Niazo
Vs. The State” (2022 PCr.LJ 36 Sindh).

14. While disclosing the motive, complainant stated in
his report that the occurrence had taken place because of

land dispute. During cross-examination he stated that:

SALE ESR LN ko fac rbott 2007 Me pials
Sie ta a (WED MAF Wale A Balt Goa de 22 all
SI Fords tu? FS bBo foi plt este tale
welt whirls pe riS fe ON een

Except the above narrations of complainant in his

cross-examination which do not divulge any land dispute
between the appellant and deceased, prosecution has failed
to bring even an iota of evidence in support of the motive

mentioned in the FIR. No doubt, motive is not the

Tajamnul/cs*) OB: Hon'ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Naeem Anwar
-26-

requirement of law because sometimes murders are
committed even for no motive while sometimes the motive
is known only to accused, deceased and Almighty Allah,
however, the law is settled that once a motive is set up by
complainant then he is bound to prove the same through
evidence. In case of his failure to do so, the prosecution
must suffer the consequence and not the defence. In the case
titled “Pathan Vs. The State” (2015 SCMR 315), the

Hon’ble apex Court observed that:

True that, motive in legal parlance is ordinarily not
considered as a principal or primary evidence in a murder
case, however, in some rare cases like the present one, the
motive would play a very vital and decisive role for
committing a murder. As the motive has almost disappeared
for want of proof and being entirely feeble, artificial and not
at all appealing to a prudent mind, therefore, it has rendered
the entire episode of the tragedy doubtful. On this score too
the prosecution case is liable to be discarded as a whole.

Further guidance in this regard is sought from

6

‘Mst. Sughra_ Begum and another Vs. The State and
others” (2015 SCMR 1142). Thus, in light of the wisdom

contained in the above referred dicta and keeping in view
the facts and circumstances of the present case, failure of
prosecution to establish the motive set up in the FIR has
adverse bearing on the case of prosecution.

13. Upshot of the above discussion is that the case of
prosecution is suffering from inherent infirmities and

inconsistencies creating reasonable doubts in prudent mind

Tajamul/cs*| DB; Hon'ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Naeem Anwar

Hor/blé Mr Justice Milisminai laa Rhan

-27-

with regard to involvement of the appellant in murder of
deceased. It is well celebrated principle for administration of
Justice that the burden is always on prosecution to prove its
case against the appellant beyond shadow of reasonable
doubt and even a single doubt, if found reasonable, is
enough to warrant acquittal of the accused because the
damage resulting from erroneous sentence is irreversible.
Reliance is placed on “Ayub Masih Vs. The State” (PLD
2002 SC 1048) wherein the Hon’ble apex Court has held

that:

It is hardly necessary to reiterate that the prosecution is
obliged to prove its case against the accused beyond any
reasonable doubt and if it fails to do so the accused is entitled
to the benefit of doubt as of right. It is also firmly settled that
if there is an element of doubt as to the guilt of the accused
the benefit of that doubt must be extended to him. The doubt
of course must be reasonable and not imaginary or artificial.
The rule of benefit of doubt, which is described as the golden
rule, is essentially a 'rule of prudence which cannot be
ignored while dispensing justice in accordance with law. It is
based on the maxim, "it is better that ten guilty persons be
acquitted rather than one innocent person be convicted", In
simple words it means that utmost care should be taken by
the Court in convicting an accused. It was held in The State
vy. Mushtaq Ahmed (PLD 1973 SC 418) that this rule is
antithesis of haphazard approach or reaching a fitful
decision in a case. It will not be out of place to mention here
that this rule occupies a pivotal place in the Islamic law and
is enforced rigorously in view of the saying of the Holy
Prophet (p.b.u.h) that the "mistake of Qazi (Judge) in
releasing a criminal is better than his mistake in punishing
an innocent."

16. For what has been discussed above, the learned trial

Tajamut/cs*| OB: Hon‘ble Mr, Justice Muhammad Naeem Anwar

‘bled Mr, Justice Muhammad Jiaz than
- 28 -
ry

recorded conviction of the appellant on very flimsy grounds,
hence, the impugned judgment needs reversal in the
circumstances. Resultantly, instant appeal is allowed and
appellant Islam Wali son of Hazrat Wali is acquitted of the
charge leveled against him in the present case. He be
released forthwith from jail, if not required in any other )

case.

17. Above are the reasons of our short order of the even

date.
Announced 1
Dt: 15.02.2023 .
JUDGE
JUDGE
% Tajamul/csr| DB: ——_-Hon’ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Naeem Anwar

Hon'ble Mir. Justice Muhammad {iar Khan

