SCANNED

-l-

JUDGMENT SHEET
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
MINGORA BENCH (DAR-UL-QAZA), SWAT
(Judicial Department)

J.Cr.A No.541-M/2019

Zeshan Akbar s/o Muhammad Akbar Khan, r/o Gulkada No.1, Saidu
Sharif, District Swat (presently confined at Central Jail, Mardan).

(Appellant)
Versus
The State
(Respondents)
Present: Barrister Asad-ur-Rehman, Advocate for the Appellant.
Mr. Haq Nawaz Khan, A.A.G for the State.
Qazi Farid Ahmad, Advocate for the Respondent/
Complainant.
Date of hearing: 26.05.2021
JUDGMENT

WIQAR_ AHMAD, J.- Appellant namely Zeshan Akbar
is aggrieved of judgment dated 06.05.2019 of the learned
Additional Sessions Judge (Model Criminal Trial Court),
Swat whereby he was convicted and sentenced as
follows;

1. u/s 302 (b) P.P.C to undergo life imprisonment,
with directions to pay Rs.200,000/- as
compensation to the legal heirs of the deceased
within the meaning of section 544-A Cr.P.C or
in default to undergo six months simple
imprisonment;

2. u/s 324 P.P.C to undergo five (05) years R.I; and

3. u/s 19 of the Arms Act to undergo six (06)
months imprisonment with a fine of Rs.2,000/-
or in default to undergo one month S.I1.

All the substantive sentences were ordered to
run concurrently with benefit of section 382-B
Cr.P.C.

Sabz Ati/* OB: HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ISHTIAG IBRAHIM.

HON’BLE MA. JUSTICE WIQAR AHMAD

-2-

2. F.I.R No.306 (Ex.PW7/1) dated 10.07.2016
under sections 302, 324, 201 P.P.C and section 15 of the
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Arms Act, 2013 was registered at
Police Station Saidu Sharif, Swat on the basis of
murasila (Ex.PW9/2) sent by Hazrat Jamal IHC (PW-9)
from Casualty of Saidu Sharif Hospital to the police
station. Report of the occurrence was lodged by
complainant Kamran Akbar (PW-11) in injured
condition to the effect that on the eventful day, he was
sleeping in his room, situated inside the spot house. He
woke up on hearing fire shot, came out of his room and
saw a pistol with his brother accused Zeshan Akbar
while his father Muhammad Akbar Khan was laying in
injured condition as he had been fired at, by appellant
Zeshan Akbar. When complainant was lifting his injured
father, appellant Zeshan Akbar also fired at the
complainant, as a result of which, he also sustained
injury on his left knee joint. Both the injured were taken
to the hospital by Imran Akbar (PW-12). Motive behind
the occurrence was stated to be frequent quarrels of
accused Zeshan Akbar with his father Muhammad Akbar
Khan, regarding which, his father had also filed an
application for initiation of legal action against the

appellant. Beside the injured person, the occurrence was

Sabz Ali/* oe: HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ISHTIAQ IBRAHIM
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE WIQAR AHMAD
-3-

also stated to have been witnessed by other inmates of
the house.

3. Injury sheets of both the injured persons were
prepared by Hazrat Jamal IHC (PW-9), scriber of the
report. Muhammad Akbar Khan succumbed to his
injuries while he was being treated in the hospital.
Accordingly his inquest report Ex.PW9/6 was prepared
and section 302 P.P.C was also inserted in record of the
case. Injured/complainant was medically examined by
Dr. Saifullah (PW-5) vide his medico legal report
Ex.PW5/1 while autopsy on dead body of deceased
Muhammad Akbar Khan was conducted by Dr. Jamil
Ahmad (PW-6), same day and accordingly the post-

mortem report Ex.PW6/1, was prepared.

4. Sher Alam Khan A.S.I (PW-15) conducted
investigation in the case. He drafted sketch (Ex.PW15/1)
of the crime scene on pointation of the eyewitnesses.
During spot inspection, 02 empties of 9mm were taken
in possession through recovery memo Ex.PW2/1. Blood
stained garments of the injured/complainant and
deceased then injured, were taken in possession through
memos Ex.PW13/1 and Ex.PW14/1. He also recorded
statements of PWs u/s 161 Cr.P.C. Copy of the

application allegedly constituting immediate cause of

Sabz ay| OB: HON’GLE MR. JUSTICE ISHTIAQ IBRAHIM.

BLE AHMAD
-4-
commission of offence, was also obtained and
subsequently placed on record as Ex.PW15/13.
Likewise, copy of complaint u/s 107/151 Cr.P.C filed
against appellant Zeshan Akbar before the concerned
Magistrate was also obtained and subsequently placed on

record as Ex.PW15/14.

5. The appellant was initially absconding,
therefore challan for proceeding u/s 512 Cr.P.C was
submitted against him, however, during _ said
proceedings, he was arrested by the police of District
Malakand. After transferring the appellant to District
Swat, he was formally arrested in this case on 02.8.2016
vide his card of arrest Ex.PW15/25. During
interrogation, on 03.08.2016, he disclosed that after
commission of the offence, he had delivered the crime
pistol to one Bakht Afsar. The appellant also led the
police to house of Bakht Afsar, who produced the crime
pistol by bringing it from the house of his neighbour
Aminullah. In this regard, Bakht Afsar and Aminullah
got recorded their statements u/s 164 Cr.P.C on
06.08.2016 before the learned Judicial Magistrate,
wherein they disclosed to have kept the crime pistol as
fiduciary for the appellant besides disclosing that the

appellant had also narrated them the story of commission

Sabz aiys| oa: HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ISHTIAQ IBRAHIM
HON'BLE MR, JUSTICE WIQAR AHMAD.
-5-

of the offence, hence, both the above named persons
were also made accused in the case and accordingly
sections 201 P.P.C and 15 of the Arms Act were inserted
in the case through memo Ex.PW15/36. On 21.08.2016,
both the subsequently nominated accused (Bakht Afsar
and Aminullah) were arrested vide their card of arrest
Ex.PW15/37. On completion of investigations against
all the accused including the present appellant,
supplementary challan (Ex.PW8/2) was submitted for
trial before the learned trial Court. They were formally
indicted for commission of the offence on 19.12.2016, to
which they did not plead guilty and claimed trial. It is
pertinent to mention here that during trial, the
injured/complainant and legal heirs of deceased had
effected compromise with co-accused Bakht Afsar and
Aminullah and therefore they were acquitted by the
learned trial Court on the basis of compromise vide order
dated 01.02.2017. In order to substantiate its case against
the present appellant/convict, the prosecution produced
and examined as many as 15 witnesses followed by
statement of the appellant recorded u/s 342, Cr.P.C,
wherein he denied the prosecution allegations, however
he neither wished to be examined on oath nor desired to

produce evidence in defence.

Sabz Ali/* oe: HON’BLE MA. JUSTICE ISHTIAQ IBRAHIM

HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE WIQAR AHMAD
-6-

6. On conclusion of the trial, the appellant was
convicted and sentenced by the learned trial Court as
stated above vide its judgment dated 06.05.2019, hence,

this jail criminal appeal.

7. Arguments heard and record of the case was
perused with the valuable assistance of learned counsel

for the parties and learned Assistant A.G representing the

State.

8. It is case of the prosecution against the present
appellant that he had committed murder of his father
Muhammad Akbar Khan beside causing injury to his
brother complainant Kamran Akbar (PW-11) by firing at
them. The incident had taken place inside joint house of
the deceased and his sons. In support of its allegations
against the appellant, the prosecution mainly relies upon
ocular account furnished by the complainant namely
Kamran Akbar and another eyewitness namely Imran
Akbar. They were examined in the case before the
learned trial Court as PW-11 and PW-12, respectively.
From critical analysis of their statements, it appears that
their testimonies were trustworthy, confidence inspiring
and unimpeachable, as on all the materials points they
have remained consistent. Their testimonies were also

fully in line with the initial prosecution version. It is

Sabz Aly| OB: HON’BLE MA. JUSTICE ISHTIAQ IBRAHIM,

HON’BLE MIA, JUSTICE WIQAR AHMAD
-7-

necessary to note here that the occurrence had taken
place on 10.07.2016 whereas both these eyewitnesses
were examined by the prosecution, after a considerable
time on 30.04.2019, before the learned trial Court,
despite that both these witnesses were in conformity with
each other qua time and place of occurrence beside being
unanimous regarding all other events having relevancy
with the incident. Despite of confronting these
eyewitnesses, during their cross examination by the
defence in a very hectic and confusing manner, they had
successfully explained the respective points assigned to
them, deceased and other inmates of the house in the site
plan (Ex.PW15/1) qua their presence on the spot at the
relevant time of the occurrence. It may be observed here
that the defence, despite strenuous effort, had not been
able to elicit even a single word from the mouths of these
two eyewitnesses in favour of the appellant/convict.
Overall testimony of these eyewitnesses of the
occurrence could not be shattered and there was not a
single occasion on the entire record to render their
presence on spot at the relevant time doubtful. The
complainant (PW-11) had got injuries in the incident
while eyewitness Imran Akbar (PW-12) had shifted the
deceased then injured and the complainant (PW-11) to

the hospital, soon after the occurrence. This fact would

Sabz aye OB: HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ISHTIAQ IBRAHIM

INBLE Mi [MAD
-8-

be of importance to reiterate here that Imran Akbar
(PW-12) was also son of deceased as well as brother of
the complainant as well as the appellant. He was
admittedly residing with his family members in same
house.

9. Time of this unfortunate incident was 07:30
hours i.e. early in the morning and same was also
corroborated by the time noted in the medial reports and
other circumstantial evidence available on the record. As
per statement of doctor (PW-5), he had examined
injured/complainant Kamran Akbar at 07:50 AM i.e. just
after 20 minutes of the occurrence. Therefore, in the
circumstances, the presence of eyewitness Imran Akbar
(PW-12) on the spot at the relevant time was quite

natural.

10. There is no denial of the fact that complainant
was son of the deceased who had himself sustained
injury in the occurrence and thus his presence is
established on the spot as there is no clue establishing
that he had self-inflicted the injury to falsely enrobe the
appellant (real brother) for the murder of his father.
Presence of the eyewitness Imran Akbar (PW-12) on the
spot at the relevant time was also well established by the

prosecution being inmate of same house where the

Sabz aty*| oB: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ISHTIAG IBRAHIM,
HON'BLE MR, JUSTICE WIQAR AHMAD
-9-
occurrence had taken place. His testimony cannot be
discarded even on the reason that he was closely related
to the deceased and injured, because he was also
similarly related to the appellant. There is nothing on
record which would transpire that the PWs had any
motive to falsely implicate the appellant in the case.
Their established natural presence on the spot at the
relevant time could not be brushed aside on the ground
of mere close relationship with the deceased. In this
respect, reliance may also be placed on judgment in the
case of “Zafar Iqbal and others V/s. The State” reported
as 2014 SCMR 1227 wherein it was held by the august

Supreme Court of Pakistan that:

“Mere relationship of prosecution witnesses
with deceased cannot render their evidence
unreliable unless it is established that they had
motive to implicate accused falsely”.

No reason could be pointed out on record
which may have motivated the prosecution witnesses to

falsely depose against the appellant.

11. In addition to the above, the occurrence had
taken place at 07:30 hours whereas the report had been
lodged by the complainant at 08:10 hours, just after 40
minutes. Keeping in mind the distance between hospital

and spot house, it was a promptly lodged report

Saber Ali/* bB: HON'BLE MR, JUSTICE ISHTIAQ IBRAHIM
HON‘BLE MR. JUSTICE WIGAR AHMAD
-10-
excluding the possibility of substitution of real culprit. It
was a broad daylight occurrence and both the parties
were residing in a joint house and were closely related,
therefore, the question of misidentification would also
not arise. It would not be out of place to mention here
that except allegations of keeping the crime pistol in
their possession and screening off such evidence, no role
had been attributed to acquitted co-accused Bakht A fsar
and Aminullah while the role of effective firing upon the
deceased then injured and complainant had specifically
been attributed to the present appellant. In such
circumstances, we would feel no hesitation to hold that it
was a case of single accused. In view of the facts that it
was a broad day light occurrence, the parties being
closely related and a prompt report was lodged, the
substitution of real culprit, in the circumstances, was a
rare phenomenon. Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan
while giving its judgment in the case of ‘Khan Naveed
and another Vs. The State and others’ reported as 2008
SCMR 1480, had, inter alia held that appellant in the
case had singly been charged and that in absence of any
animosity existing earlier, there had been rare chances of
his false implication. Relevant findings of apex Court
recorded therein are reproduced hereunder for ready

reference.

Sabz aty| OB: HON'BLE MR, JUSTICE ISHTIAQ IBRAHIM
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE WIQAR AHMAD.
-li-

“It may also be borne in mind that the
appellant/ accused has been only single person
held to be liable in the commission of murder
and no animus has been suggested to the P.Ws.
for his false implication in the crime, therefore,
there could not be any mistaken identity or
substitution in place of the real culprit/assailant
ie. the appellant. The learned Judge in
Chambers also after scrutiny, analysis and
assessment of the entire evidence, on record has
arrived at the conclusion that prosecution has
proved the guilt of the appellant/convict accused
beyond reasonable doubt and thus, has
maintained the conviction and sentence passed
by the trial Court.”

Further reliance in this respect may also be
placed on the cases of ‘Miran Bux and another Vs.
Muhammad Amir and another’ reported as 1986 SCMR
1225 and ‘Muhammad Basharat Vs. The State and

another’ reported as 2003 SCMR 554.

12. Injured was medially examined by the doctor
(PW-5) who had got his medico-legal report Ex.PW5/1
prepared while post-mortem of deceased then injured
Muhammad Akbar Khan was conducted by the doctor
(PW-6) vide post-mortem report Ex.PW6/1. The medical
evidence furnished by the prosecution in the shape of
statements of PW-5 & PW-6 was fully supporting the
ocular account of the occurrence as statements of the
complainant (PW-11) and eyewitness (PW-12), were in
line with initial report Ex.PW9/2, site plan Ex.PW15/1,

injury sheets (Ex.PW9/4 & Ex.PW9/3) and medical

reports of the deceased as well as _ the

Sabz auy*| 0B: HON’GLE MR, JUSTICE ISHTIAQ IBRAHIM

HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE WIQAR AHMAQ.
-12-
injured/complainant. Remarks of the doctors regarding
sustaining firearms injuries by both the complainant his
and deceased father were further supporting the

prosecution version.

13. The crime pistol was also recovered on
pointation of the appellant vide pointation/recovery
memo Ex.PW10/2. Appellant was a licensee of said
pistol and copy whereof was also brought on record.
With regard to the recovery of the crime pistol, the
testimonies of the relevant witnesses could not be
shattered by the defence during their cross examination.
The matching report (Ex.PE) of F.S.L regarding the
crime pistol and crime empties was also strengthening

the prosecution version against the appellant.

14. During interrogation, the appellant had also
pointed out the crime scene to the I.O in presence
of marginal witnesses vide pointation memo Ex.PW10/4.
The prosecution had produced one Gulzar constable, the
marginal witness of the pointation proceedings as PW-
10. This witness was cross examined at length and he has
have given very credible testimony by confirming all
events he had witnessed during the pointation

proceedings, therefore this piece of corroboratory

Sabz air oB: HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ISHTIAQ IBRAHIM
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE AHMAD
-13-

corroboratory evidence could be used against the
appellant.

15. Motive alleged by the prosecution in initial
report (murasila Ex.PW9/2) was that the appellant had
frequently been quarreling with his deceased father prior
to the occurrence. In the first report, reference of filing a
complaint against the appellant by his deceased father
for legal action was also given. Same fact was further
corroborated by the prosecution witnesses (PW-11 &
PW-12) before the Court in their respective statements.
In this regard, the investigating officer (PW-15) had also
placed on record copy of the application filed by the
deceased before D.P.O, Swat for legal action against the
appellant. Copy of the complaint u/s 107/151 Cr.P.C
lodged on behalf of the deceased against the appellant
before the Magistrate was also brought on record. The
referred documents were produced and duly exhibited
during trial as ExPW15/13 & Ex.PW15/14, respectively.
These documents were bearing the date of 04.07.2016
i.e. about 06 days prior to the occurrence. In the
circumstances, it could safely be inferred that relations
between the appellant and his deceased father had been

strained.

Sabz Ali/* OB: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ISHTIAQ IBRAHIM
rN A, wil JAD
-14-

16. Learned counsel for the appellant had also
raised a plea that the appellant had been a drug addict at
the relevant time, which fact had also been admitted by
the prime prosecution witnesses (PW-11 & PW-12)
before the Court during their cross examination. To
support his assertion, learned counsel for the appellant
referred to certain portions of cross examination of said
PWs. Said part of cross-examination of PW-11 is

reproduced as under for ready reference.

ice addict Fb Beth eds Mit Seely

Th for irulsre oS SU Seen yx

(Pe ss esl Leds See iy be Ut at Gs
Be std Lys

Further ahead in his cross-examination, the

witness also stated that;

Drug Rehabilitation L A Syeiet Secu y

aM wend AF ia PircueizzCentre

Ste du wie diptac ubict Se Mey Biel)

-<
Almost similar narration had been given by
PW-12, therefore his statement need not to be
reproduced. Taking of intoxicants by a person on his will
and commission of an offence during such state of
intoxication has never been recognized as an exception

from the criminal liability that is ensued as a result of

doing of the act. Section 85 P.P.C has only been

Sabz aw| DB: HON’BLE MR, JUSTICE ISHTIAQ IBRAHIM.
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE WIQAR AHMAD
-15-

providing an exception in those cases where the
intoxicant is administered against will of a person and
due to such intoxication he lands in such a state that he
does not know the nature of the act or what he is doing is
either wrong or contrary to law. Section 85 P.P.C is
reproduced hereunder for ready reference.

85. Act of a person incapable of judgment by
reason of intoxication caused against his will.—
Nothing is an offence which is done by a person
who at the time of doing it, is, by reason of
intoxication, incapable of knowing the nature of
the act, or that he is doing what is either wrong,
or contrary to law, provided that the thing
which intoxicated him was administered to him
without knowledge or against his will.

The proviso at the foot of section 85 P.P.C
makes it manifestly clear that if a person gets
intoxication out of his free will then he cannot claim the
benefit of the general exception provided in section 85
P.P.C. It had been made clear during the course of cross-
examination of PWs that the appellant had been taking
the intoxicants on his own will. There is nothing on
record which could have suggested that the appellant had
been suffering from any debilitating mental condition at
the time of commission of the offence nor as such a
defence has ever been taken during the course of trial or
during pendency of the instant appeal. Whatever state of
mind had been produced by consuming intoxicants by the

appellant, was the direct result thereof and not because

Sabz Ali/* DB: HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ISHTIAQ IBRAHIM.
I IR MAD
-16-
of any mental illness, which fact is clear from evidence
of the prosecution. In such a case, the defence of section
85 P.P.C shall not be available to the appellant. Hon’ble
Supreme Court of Pakistan while giving its judgment in
the case of ‘Hazrat Hayat Vs. The State’ reported as

1974 SCMR 295, had dealt with a case of the influence
of intoxicants consumed by a person on his will in the

following manner;

“Even assuming that he was under the influence
of intoxicants, he was so by his own volition as
admitted by him and, therefore, this plea could
not exculpate him. Under section 85 of the Penal
Code, an offence done by a person, who at the
time of doing it is incapable of knowing the
nature of the act, by reason of intoxication, is
excused provided that the thing which is
intoxicating him has been administered to him
without his know ledge or against his will. In the
present case, the admission of the appellant is
that he himself was a drug addict and, therefore,
this was not a case which comes within the terms
of section 85. It could nevertheless have been
treated as a mitigating circumstance, if there
was any evidence on the record to show that at
the time that the act was done or immediately
before or after it the appellant was under the
influence of intoxicants.”

In the case in hand, there is nothing on record to
suggest that the intoxicant was administered against will
of the appellant or that he had been suffering from any
mental debilitating condition. Besides the manner in
which the offence had been committed, escape of the
appellant after commission of the offence and then going
in abscondence nowhere shows that he had ever been

suffering from any mental illness.

Sabz ai| OB: HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ISHTIAQ IBRAHIM
HON'B! R, wii MAD
-17-
Lf It For what has been. discussed above, the
prosecution had proved its case against the appellant
beyond reasonable doubt, therefore, the impugned
judgment of the learned trial Court does not call for any
interference of this Court. Resultantly, the impugned
judgment is upheld and this appeal, being bereft of
merits, is accordingly dismissed.

Announced.
Dt: 26.05.2021

or? 5 ie \ sabe auys| DB: HON'BLE MR, JUSTICE ISHTIAQ IBRAHIM

a) HON'BLE MR, JUSTICE WIQAR AHMAD
