JUDGMENT SHEET

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
PESHAWAR
(Judicial Department)

Cr.Misc.BA No.587-P/2015

Date of hearing: 20.04.2015

Petitioner (s): Jamal Faig by Mr. Ali Zaman, Advocate.

Respondent (s) : Asim Iqbal complainant (nemo) and the
State by Mian Arshad Jan, AAG.

JUDGMENT

ASSADULLAH KHAN CHAMMKANT, _J.- Petitioner,

Jamal Faig, being abortive to get the concession of post arrest

bail from two Courts below, through this further application,

seeks the same concession from this Court, in case FIR No.179

dated 08.06.2010, registered under sections 302/324/34 PPC,

at Police Station Lachi, District Kohat.

2. Complainant-respondent Asim Iqbal, despite service,

not in attendance, therefore, this petition cannot be kept

pending for indefinite period just to procure his attendance, as

such learned counsel for the petitioner and learned AAG for the

State heard. Record perused with their able assistance.

3. According to report of complainant Asim Iqbal,

on 08.06.2010 at 0525 hours, he alongwith his cousin Imtiaz

Khan was present near Anwar Sherin Flying Coach Adda Lachi

Bazaar, when in the meanwhile, two unknown culprits riding

on a motorbike, duly armed with Kalashnikovs, came there

and shot dead Imtiaz Khan deceased and also attempted at

his life by firing at him, but he luckily remained unscathed. He

did not charge the culprits by names. Later on, on 10.06.2010

i.e. after two days of the incident, complainant Asim Iqbal

alongwith his brother PW Ijaz Khan, recorded their statements

under section 164 Cr.P.C., wherein, they besides charging

co-accused Subha Sadiq, also nominated the present

petitioner attributing him specific role of firing on the basis of

statement of one Muhammad Ibrar who posed himself as

eyewitness of the incident. PW Muhammad Ibrar also recorded

his statement under section 164 Cr.P.C. on 10.06.2010 i.e.

after two days of the incident, wherein he only assigned the

role of firing to present petitioner and attributed the role of

driving motorbike to co-accused Subha Sadiq. The questions

as to whether Muhammad Ibrar alias Babu, who later on

introduced himself as an eyewitness of the occurrence, is a

procured witness, and if not, why he kept mum for two days,

and what would be the evidentiary value of his such belated
statement, which otherwise is contrary with the version of
complainant in his initial report, are yet to be answered by the
prosecution during trial, however, at the moment these
aspects of the case makes the case of the petitioner that of
further probe. The petitioner has not confessed his guilt
before any competent Court of law nor has anything
incriminating been recovered from his direct or indirect
possession, to connect him with the commission of offence.
On tentative assessment of the material available on record,
reasonable grounds exit, which makes the case of the
petitioner that of further inquiry into his guilt. As regard
absconsion of the petitioner, as per ratio of judgment of the
apex court in case titled, “Mitho Pitafi Vs The State”
2009 S CM R 299, mere absconsion of accused cannot
be a ground for refusal of bail when otherwise the case of
bail is made out. It is settled law that bail may not be
refused merely on the ground that accused is charged for a
heinous offence, when otherwise on merits, he is found

entitled to concession of bail because any mistaken relief of

bail, can be repaired by convicting the accused, if proved
guilty at the trial, but no proper reparation can be offered for
his unjustified incarceration, albeit, his acquittal in the long
run.

4. For the reasons discussed above, this petition is
allowed. Accused/petitioner is admitted to bail provided he
furnishes bail bonds in the sum of Rs.3,00,000/- with two
sureties each in the like amount to the satisfaction of learned
Illaqa Judicial Magistrate/MOD, concerned. The sureties must
be local, reliable and mean of means.

Announced.
20.04.2015.

JUDGE

