IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
PESHAWAR,
[Judicial Department].

Crl. Appeal No.163-P/2018

Johar Ali son of Muzamil Khan,
t/o Mirjai PayanDistrict Nowshera.

Appellant (s)
VERSUS
The State etc
Respondent (s)
For Appellant (s) :- Mian Arshad Jan, Advocate.
For State - Mr. Muhammad Nisar AAG.
Respondent No.2. In person.
Date of hearing: 09.12.2021
JUDGMENT

ROOH-UL-AMIN_ KHAN, _J:-This criminal appeal, filed by
Johar Ali, the appellant, is directed against the judgment dated
14.02.20218, passed by learned Trial Court/Additional Sessions
Judge-VI, Peshawar, whereby he has been convicted under
section 302(b) PPC and sentenced to undergo life imprisonment
and to pay Rs.50,000/-, as compensation in terms of section
544-A Cr.P.C. and in default thereof to undergo six months
simple imprisonment, in case FIR No.159 dated 29.04.2014,
under sections 302/34 PPC, Police Station Nowshera Kalan.
Benefit of section 382-B Cr.P.C., has been extended to him.

2. The prosecution’s case as per contents of First
Information Report (“FIR”) Exh.PA is that on 29.04.2014 at
2010 hours, complainant Asad Khan (PW.3), in company of dead

body of his cousin Robaid deceased, reported to Umar Nasir ASI
Cr.A, No.163-P/2018

(PW.6), in the mortuary of DHQ hospital, Nowshera, to the effect
that on 29.04.2014 he along with the Amir Muhammad and the
deceased was present in the fields of Gul Nazar, situated in
village Miraji Payan, District Nowshera. At 1845 hours, he and
Amir Muhammad left the deceased and started towards their
houses, but in the meantime, a motorcar bearing registration
No.IDF.9938, driven by Lazamin, accompanied by appellant
Johar Ali and Khan Zamin, sitting in front and rear seat,
respectively, arrived at the spot. The three accused came down of
the motorcar and started firing at Robaid, as a result, he got hit
and succumbed to injuries on the way when he was being shifted
to the hospital. Besides the complainant, the occurrence is stated
to have been witnessed by Amir Muhammad. Motive behind the
occurrence is previous blood feud between the parties. Umair
Nasir ASI (PW.6) recorded report of the complainant in the shape
of Murasila Exh.PA/1 and sent the same to Police Station on the
basis of which FIR Exh.PA was registered against the accused.
He also prepared injury sheet and inquest report Exh.PW.6/1 and
Exh.PW.6/2, respectively, of the deceased and referred his dead
body for autopsy to the mortuary under the escort of constable
Rafi ud Din.

3. Dr. Iftikhar Khan (PW.5) conducted autopsy on the dead
body of the deceased on 29.04.2016 and found the following
injuries on his body vide postmortem report Exh.PM:-

1. Firearm entry wound on left upper lateral chest 4

inch in size.
Cr.A. No.163-P/2018

2. Firearm exit wound on right axilla 1 % inch in
size.

3. Firearm entry wound on the left lateral lower
chest area 4 inch in size.

4. Firearm exit wound on right lower chest | inch in
size.

5. Firearm entry wound on anterior medial aspect of
right thigh % inch in size.

6. Firearm entry wound on the anterior medial aspect
of right thigh % inch in size.

7. Firearm entry wound on the medial aspect of the
right thigh % inch in size.

8. Firearm exit wound on the lateral aspect of the
right thigh near wound No.6 one inch in size.

9. Firearm entry wound on the lateral aspect of the
left thigh % inch in size.

10.Firearm exit wound on antero medial aspect of the
left thigh 3-4 inch in size and also causing
lacerated wound of the penis due to bone piolees
4 inch in size.

Opinion: In his opinion the deceased die due to

injuries to vital organs (lungs, major organs) and

hypovaluemic shock. He opined the probable time

between injury and death as : one to one and half

hour and between death and postmortem as one to

two hours.

4. Khayal Nawaz Inspector (PW.7), conducted investigation
in the case, who proceeded to the spot and prepared site plan
Exh.PB on the pointation of eyewitnesses. During spot
inspection, he secured bloodstained grass from the place of the
deceased vide recovery memo Exh.PW.3/1 and 17 empties of

7.62 bore from the places of the accused vide recovery memo
Cr.A, No.163-P/2018

Exh.PW.3/2 and bloodstained last worn garments of the deceased
vide recovery memo Exh.PW.7/1. He initiated proceedings under
sections 204 and 87 Cr.P.C. against the accused, recorded
statements of the PWs under section 161 Cr.P.C. and after
completion of investigation handed over case file to SHO who
submitted challan in terms of 512 Cr.P.C. against the accused.

5. On arrest of the appellant and completion of necessary
investigation, supplementary challan was submitted against him
before the learned trial Court, where he was formally charge
sheeted to which he pleaded not guilty and claimed trial, hence,
the prosecution’s evidence was invited. To prove its case, the
prosecution examined as many as ten witnesses. After closure of
the prosecution’s evidence, statement of the appellant was
recorded under section 342 Cr.P.C., wherein he denied the
prosecution’s allegation and professed his innocence. He,
however, neither wished to be examined on oath under section
340(2) Cr.P.C. nor opted to produce evidence in defence. On
conclusion of trial, the learned trial Court, after hearing both the
sides, convicted and sentenced the appellant as mentioned above,
hence, this appeal.

6. Arguments of learned counsel for the parties heard and
record perused with their able assistance.

7. It appears from record that occurrence in this case has
taken place on 29.04.2014 at 1845 hours, which has been
reported by complainant Asad Khan (PW.3) vide Exh.PA/1 at

2010 hours wherein he has charged the appellant along with
Cr.A, No.163-P/2018

absconding co-accused Khan Zaman and Lazmin for committing
murder of Robaid deceased with firearms. Complainant Asad, the
alleged eyewitness, is real cousin of the deceased. Though his
evidence is not to be discarded on the sole ground that he is close
relative and interested witness, but necessary caution has to be
observed in accepting his evidence because it is generally
approved proposition that in case of rivalries and enmities, there
is general tendency that a person from victim side will pose
himself as eye witness of the occurrence and shall rope in the
influential members of rival side for participating in the assault,
with a particular designed role, therefore, the veracity of this
witness has to be examined with utmost care and caution,
particularly, with regard to his presence at the spot at the time of
occurrence when he has not disclosed the purpose of his visit to
the spot. In his initial report Exh.PA/1, the complainant has not stated
a single word as to when and how he met the deceased and they both
reached the spot. Similarly, he has also not disclosed the purpose of
his visit to the spot. In this view of the matter, complainant is also a
chance witness. It has now been well settled that for conviction of an
accused person it would be highly unsafe to rely upon testimony of a
chance witness when remained uncorroborated and for conviction of a
accused on capital charge on the basis of testimony of chance witness,
the court has to be at guard and corroboration has to be sought for
relying upon such evidence. Reliance may be placed on

2017 SCMR 1710 Anwar Begum vs. Akhter

Hussain. In case titled, “Mst. Rukhsana Begum and others Vs
Cr.A, No.163-P/2018

Sajjad and others” (2017 SCMR 596), it has been held by the
Hon’ble Supreme Court that single doubt reasonably shown that a
witness’s presence on the crime spot was doubtful during the
occurrence, it would be sufficient to discard his testimony as a
whole and that said principle may be pressed into service in case
where such witness was seriously inimical or appeared to be
chance witness. Keeping in view the above settled principles in
mind, we will reappraise the evidence furnished by the
complainant, the alleged eyewitness. He while appearing as PW.3
deposed as under:-

“On the day of occurrence I along with deceased Robaid son of

Mukhtiar was sitting at the place of occurrence. When I left him
and went 10 paces ahead, in the meanwhile, a gray colour corolla
motorcar bearing No.9938 driven by accused Raz Ameen
accompanied by Johar Ali in front and Khan Zameen in rear seat
arrived there. The said three persons on getting out of the vehicle
started firing at Robaid and thereafter decamped from the spot.
Robaid was hit. Other people also attracted to the spot. I took the
injured Robaid to the hospital and reported the matter to police.
On the way to hospital Robaid succumbed to injures. I also
thumb impressed my report which was recorded by the police in
the hospital. My other relatives came to the hospital; therefore, I
went back to the place of occurrence. The I.O came at the spot
and I pointed out the place of occurrence to him. The LO
prepared site plan in torch light. He collected bloodstained grass
from the spot vide memo Exh.PW.3/1 and 17 empties of 7.62

bore vide recovery memo Exh.PW.3/2 in his presence. The
Cr.A, No.163-P/2018

recovery memos bear my as well as signature of marginal

witness”.
8. In the initial report Exh.PA/1 the complainant has alleged
that he along with Ameer Muhammad was sitting with the
deceased prior to the occurrence and no sooner they left the
deceased, the accused arrived in a motorcar and opened fire at the
deceased, but in his court statement, he has not stated a single
word about presence of Amir Muhammad when he was allegedly
sitting with the deceased. For ready reference relevant part of his
statement is referred:- “On the day of occurrence I along with
deceased Robaid was sitting at the place of occurrence and
when I left him and went 10 paces ahead, the accused arrived
at the spot”. In cross-examination he has stated that he has
mentioned in the initial report that after the death of Robaid
deceased he was shifted to hospital in vehicle. This part of his
statement also negates his report wherein he has mentioned that
deceased sustained injuries and he succumbed to injuries on the
way to hospital. He while further contradicting his report deposed
that:- “The dead body of Robaid was lying on the surface of
barren land which was not cultivable. He took the dead body
of Robaid from the spot and reached to the hospital within
half an hour approximately”. This part of his cross-examination
is total departure from his initial report, wherein he has stated that
Robaid deceased was shifted in injured condition from the spot.
He further deposed that he is illiterate, therefore, cannot sign.

Murasila Exh.PA reveals that it also bears thumb impression of
Cr.A, No.163-P/2018

the complainant and not his signature. Contrary, in examination-
in-chief he while blowing hot and cold stated that he signed the
recovery memos Exh.PW.3/1 and Exh.PW.3/2, in respect of
blood and bloodstained articles taken into possession by the I.O.
from the spot in his presence bear his signatures. It appears from
initial report Exh.PA/1 that complainant has not leveled any
allegation of firing against the accused at him and Amir
Muhammad despite the fact that he was the real cousin of the
deceased and on equal footing for the accused. In this view of the
matter, letting of the complainant by the accused who was at their
mercy is also beyond the comprehension of a prudent mind. Had
he been present at the spot, at the time of occurrence, the strong
probability is that he would not have been spared by the accused
so as to leave no evidence behind them. The occurrence is that of
a broad day light but the complainant while reporting the matter
has not disclosed about the caliber of weapon used by the accused
in the commission of offence. In cross-examination it is clarified
and admitted by the complainant that he can identify between
different bores of the weapons ie. shot gun, 12 bore,
Kalashnikov, M-16 pistol etc. He also admitted that at the time of
initial report he has not disclosed about the kind of weapons, the
accused were having in their possession. Self stated that when the
I.O. inspected the spot and collected the empties he then
identified the weapon. Non-disclosure of bore of the weapons
used in the commission of the offence despite the fact that the

complainant could identify different bores is another strong
Cr.A, No.163-P/2018

circumstance which makes his presence at the time of occurrence
highly doubtful.

9. One of the eyewitnesses, namely, Amir Muhammad is
not only abandoned by the prosecution being won over but the
complainant in his statement before the court has excluded him as
an eyewitness of the occurrence which is suggestive of the fact
that Amir Muhammad was not present at the spot a the time of
occurrence, however, he being a close relative of the complainant
was cited as an eyewitness in the FIR and later on, when he was
not supporting the prosecution’s case, he was not brought in the
witness box.

10. Except bald statement of complainant, not single
evidence has been brought on record either by the complainant or
Khial Nawaz Inspector I.O. (PW.7) in proof of the motive. In
cross-examination the IO. has stated that “It is correct that I
have not collected any evidence pertaining to the motive part.
It is further correct that the complainant had failed to
produce any evidence in this regard”. It is settled law that the
prosecution though not called upon to establish motive in every
case, yet once it has setup a motive and failed to establish, the
prosecution must suffer consequences and not the defence.

11. Medical evidence is also not supporting version of the
complainant. The complainant has charged three accused for
indiscriminate firing at the deceased, whereas, as per post mortem
report all the entrance wounds sustained by the deceased are

having one and the same dimension of % inch. Besides, the I.O.
10
Cr.A, No.163-P/2018

has not sent the alleged crime empties to the FSL, therefore, it
remained shrouded in mystery as to whether occurrence is the job
of one person or more than one. It is settled law that any
eyewitness, who claimed his presence at the spot, must satisfy the
mind of the court through some physical circumstances or
through some corroborative evidence in support of his presence at
the spot at the time of occurrence. On reappraisal of the evidence,
we have arrived at an irresistible conclusion that complainant has
miserably failed to prove his presence at the spot at the time of
occurrence through some strong and physical circumstances or
through some corroborative evidence. In this view of the matter,
the learned trial court has landed into the field of error by
believing and relying upon his evidence.

12. Recovery of bloodstained grass and _bloodstained
garments of the deceased coupled with positive Serologist report
in respect thereof and postmortem report of the deceased, prove
the unnatural death of the deceased with firearm at the place as
alleged by the prosecution, but these supporting and
corroborative pieces of evidence by no stretch of imagination tell
the name(s) of the culprits. Such pieces of evidence are always
taken in aid of the direct evidence and not in isolation. In this
regard reliance can be placed in on the judgments rendered by the
Hon’ble apex court in Ijaz Ahmed’s case (1997 SCMR 1279
and Asadullah’s case (PLD 1971 SC 541). Besides, in case
titled, “Saifullah vs the State” (1985 SCMR 410), it has been

ruled by the Hon’ble Supreme Court that:-
11
Cr.A, No.163-P/2018

“When there is no eyewitness to be relied upon,

then there is nothing, which can _ be

corroborated by the recovery”.
13. So far as abscondence of the appellant is concerned, it is
settled law that conviction on abscondence alone cannot be
sustained. Reliance placed on Amir Gul vs the State (1981
SCMR 182).
14. It is well settled law that accused person is presumed to
be innocent till the time he is proved guilty beyond reasonable
doubt and this presumption of innocence continued until the
prosecution succeeded in proving the charge against the accused
beyond reasonable doubt on the basis of legally admissible,
confidence inspiring, trustworthy and reliable evidence. In the
instant case, the prosecution has failed to prove the guilt of the
appellant through the above standard of evidence.
15. Crux of the above discussion is that the prosecution has
miserably failed to bring home guilt the appellant through cogent
and confidence inspiring direct or circumstantial evidence
beyond shadow of reasonable doubt. The prosecution’s evidence
is pregnant with doubts and according to golden principle of
benefit of doubt; one substantial doubt is enough for acquittal of
the accused. Reliance placed on case titled, “Muhammad
Zaman Vs the State and others” (2014 SCMR 749). Basically,
it is the principle enshrined in Islamic jurisprudence, fourteen
hundred years ago that “it would be better to acquit ten culprits

than convicting one innocent soul.” which has now been
12
Cr.A, No.163-P/2018

transformed into the form of the principle that, “acquitting by
error would be better than convicting by error’. The said
commandment has evolved into the theory of benefit of doubt,
which, invariably, is extended to the accused for safe
administration of criminal justice.

16. Accordingly, this appeal is allowed. Conviction and
sentences of the appellant recorded by the learned trial court vide
impugned judgment are set aside and he is hereby acquitted of
the charge leveled against him in the instant case. He be set at
liberty forthwith, if not required and confined in any other case.
17. These are the reasons of our short order of even date,
which is reproduced below:-

“For reasons to be recorded later on, we allow this
appeal, set-aside the conviction and sentences of
appellant Johar Ali son of Muzamil Khan, recorded
under section 302(b)/34 PPC by the learned Additional
Sessions Judge-VI, Nowshera vide judgment dated
14.02.2018, in case FIR No.159 dated 29.04.2014,
under sections 302/34 PPC, Police Station Nowshera
Kalan and hereby acquit him from the charge in the
cited case. He be set at liberty forthwith, if not
required/confined in any other case”.

Announced:
09.12.2021

M.Siraj Afridi PS

Senior Puisne Judge

JUDGE

DB of Mr. Justice Rooh ul Amin Khan Hon’ble Senior Puisne Judge; AND
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Ijaz Anwar

Cr.A, No.163-P/2018

13
