JUDGMENT SHEET
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, D.LKHAN BENCH
(Judicial Department)

Criminal Appeal No.73-D/2015

Malik Aamir Sultan and two others
Versus

The State and another

JUDGMENT
Date of hearing 04.4.2018
Appellants by: M/S Sanaullah Khan Gandapur, Salimullah

Khan Ranazai, Ahmad Ali Khan, Muhammad
Ismail Alizai and Shah Shujaullah, Advocates.

Respondents by: Mr. Kamran Hayat Miankhel, Addl: A.G and
Abdul Latif Khan Baloch, Advocate.

ISHTIAQ IBRAHIM, J.- Through this single judgment,
we propose to dispose of instant Criminal Appeal No.73-
D/2015 filed by appellants Malik Aamir Sultan and two
others against their conviction and sentence and Criminal
Revision No.16-D/2015 filed by complainant
Muhammad Amin for enhancement of sentence awarded
to the appellants, as both the matters arise out of one and
the same judgment dated 13.10.2015 of learned
Additional Sessions Judge-II, D.I-Khan, whereby they
were convicted under sections 302(b)/34 PPC and
sentenced to life imprisonment on two counts with fine of
Rs.200000/- against each under section 544-A Cr.P.C
and in default of payment of fine, to undergo

imprisonment for six months. The sentences were
-2-

ordered to run concurrently and benefit of section 382-B

Cr.P.C was extended to them.

2. The prosecution story as divulged from the FIR
lodged by complainant Muhammad Amin is that on
17.6.2012 at 1335 hours, he in the company of his injured
brother Mehrban who was unconscious and dead body of
deceased Inayatullah reported the matter at Emergency
Room of Civil Hospital, D.I.Khan to the effect that he
and his brother Mehrban and friend Inayatullah had
obtained landed property in dairy colony on lease; that on
the said date, he alongwith his brother and friend, after
irrigating the land, were taking rest beneath the ‘chapri’
when at about 1245 hours, Aamir Sultan and his two
brothers boarded in Quingqi whereas two unknown
persons on motorcycle came there and diverted the water
to their land; that Mehrban and Inayatullah forbade them,
upon which they (accused) hurled abuses and opened fire
at them with their pistols. With the firing of accused,
Mehrban and Inayatullah got hit and fell down and the
accused decamped in Quingqi and motorcycle. The
complainant and his relative Safdar Salim who had
fetched lunch for them in his motorcar, shifted the
injured to hospital but on the way to hospital, Inayatullah

succumbed to the injuries. The complainant stated that
-3-

there was no previous motive, but the occurrence was the
result of dispute over water. On the said date, Mehrban

injured also succumbed to the injuries in the hospital.

3. After completion of usual investigation,
complete challan against the appellants was put in Court.
They were formally charged, to which they did not plead
guilty and claimed trial. In order to prove its case against
the appellants, the prosecution examined fifteen
witnesses including complainant and Safdar Salim. After
closure of prosecution evidence, the appellants were
examined under section 342 Cr.P.C. They professed
innocence and false implication. However, they neither
appeared as their own witnesses on oath nor produced
any evidence in their defence. On conclusion of the trial,
the learned trial Court convicted and sentenced the
appellants as mentioned above vide impugned judgment

dated 13.10.2015.

4. The learned counsels representing the
appellants vehemently contended that the complainant
and alleged eyewitness Safdar Salim were not present at
the spot at the time of alleged occurrence and were
procured later on; that there are material contradictions in
the statements of P.Ws which rendered their testimony

unbelievable; that the medical evidence and the site plan
-4-

are not in line with the ocular testimony; that neither the
utensils which PW Safdar Salim had allegedly taken with
lunch were taken into possession nor there was any blood
in the motorcar wherein the injured were shifted to the
hospital. Concluding their arguments, the learned
counsels were of the view that the learned trial Court has
not properly appreciated the evidence on record and has

fallen into the field of error by convicting the appellants.

5. As against that, the learned Addl: A.G
representing the State assisted by learned counsel for the
complainant supported the impugned judgment and while
refuting the arguments of learned counsels for the
appellants prayed for enhancement of the sentence

awarded to the appellants.

6. We have considered the submissions of learned
counsel for the parties and carefully gone through the

record.

7. The prosecution case mainly hinges on the
ocular testimony furnished by complainant Muhammad
Amin (PW-11) and Safdar Salim (PW-12), medical
evidence, recovery of empties from the spot and the

F.S.L report.
-5-

8. The first and the foremost requirement for the
proof of charge against particular set of accused is as to
whether the prosecution has been able to establish the
presence of witnesses at the spot when the occurrence
took place. In the present case, the ocular account flows
from the mouth of Muhammad Amin, brother of
deceased Mehrban who appeared as PW-11 and Safdar
Salim, relative/cousin of the complainant and deceased
Mehrban who was examined as PW-12. The stance of
these two witnesses is that they were irrigating their land
and the accused diverted the water on which an
altercation took place and thereafter firing was made, as a
result of which the two deceased lost their lives. PW
Muhammad Amin was the elder brother of deceased
Mehrban whereas deceased Inayatullah was their friend.
The site plan shows that both the P.Ws were also in the
close proximity at the time of firing and they could have
easily been targeted by the accused when the incident
took place but their unhurt escape throws doubt on their
presence at the spot at the relevant time. Even otherwise,
PW Muhammad Amin was elder and when two persons
were already murdered, how they were spared. The
stance of Safdar Salim (PW-12) is that he had taken
meals to the deceased and Muhammad Amin

complainant. During cross examination, this PW
-6-

admitted that he did not use to visit the Dairy Farm on
daily basis and on the day of occurrence, he had visited
the shop of Inayatullah on Sheikh Yousaf road opposite
Qurtaba University in connection with his personal affair
and since Inayatullah was not present there, this witness
called him on phone who told that he was at Dairy Farm
and if this witness wanted to visit him, he could go there
on transport. The presence of this witness at the spot at
the relevant time appears to be doubtful because no
utensils of meals were either noticed by the Investigating
Officer during spot inspection nor the same were taken
into possession. It is also in the evidence that the
deceased then injured were shifted to the hospital in the
motorcar of PW Safdar Salim but strangely, neither the
said motorcar was taken into possession on the same day
nor any blood was noticed in the same. Thus, the
testimony of this witness for this reason alone is
disbelieved. The record transpires that even no
instrument of husbandry belonging to the complainant
party was taken into possession which was being
possessed by them at the relevant time. The field
irrigated by the complainant has also not been observed
by the Investigating Officer at the time of preparation of
site plan. From the above discussion, it is manifest that

both the P.Ws were not present at the spot at the time of
-7-

occurrence and were procured subsequently, therefore,
their testimony is ruled out of consideration. In this

respect, reliance can be placed on the case of Gul Faraz

alias Paley Khan. Vs. The State (2015 SD 139) wherein

it was held that:-

“Moreover, the deceased and
eyewitnesses were on same footing
before the accused being brother inter-
se. Both the eyewitnesses being real
brothers of the deceased have not
shown any effort to rescue their
brother. It is also the case of
prosecution that when the deceased
was hit with the firing of accused and
fell on the ground, the deceased
thrashed him with Butt of their
Kalashnikovs, but none of the PWs has
shown any effort to move towards their
brother and rescue him from the
clutches of the accused despite that
they were having axes, which does not
appeal to a prudent mind being against
the natural human conduct as well as
against the customs and usages of our
society, particularly this part of the
country where in such like situation a
brother would not hesitate to sacrifice
his life for the sake of life of his other
brother. The conduct of eyewitnesses
like silent spectators creates
reasonable doubt about their presence
with the deceased. Had they been
present with the deceased, they must
have made some efforts for rescue of
their brother.”

Similarly, in the case of Mst. Rukhsana Begum and

others. Vs. Sajjad and others (2017 SCMR_ 596) it was

held that:-
“The site plan positions would show
that, he and the other PWs were at the
mercy of the assailants but being the
prime target even no_ threat was
extended to him. Blessing him with
unbelievable courtesy and mercy
shown to him by the accused knowing
well that he and the witnesses would
depose against them by leaving them
unhurt, is absolutely unbelievable
story. Such behaviour, on the part of
the accused runs counter to natural
human conduct and __ behaviour
explained in the provisions of Article
129 of the Qanun-e-Shahadat Order,
1984, therefore, the Court is unable to
accept such unbelievable proposition.”

9. The case of the prosecution is that deceased
Inayatullah was their friend. It is pertinent to mention
here that complainant party belongs to village Jhok
Massu while the address of deceased Inayatullah is Basti
Ghayanwali. Both these places are distantly situated from
each other. The occurrence took place in the month of
June and almost noon time. How it is possible that a
guest would be taken to such a place in the hot weather
and that too in D.I.Khan. It appears that deceased
Inayatullah was not only a guest/friend, but he was
brought by the complainant party for the accomplishment
of some job as this has been consistently suggested to
both the alleged eyewitnesses that deceased Inayatullah
was having criminal history and was involved in several

cases. This fact is further fortified by postmortem report
-9-

of deceased Inayatullah, wherein two firearm entry
wounds were observed on his person, while Mehrban
deceased, who had direct motive with the accused,
sustained solitary injury. Moreover, two firearm entry
wounds were observed by the doctor on the dead body of
deceased Inayatullah with corresponding exit wounds
whereas one firearm entry wound with corresponding
exit wound was observed on the dead body of deceased
Mehrban. All the entry wounds are carrying the
dimension of 1/4x1/4 inches while on the other hand,
three real brothers, the appellants, and two unknown
accused are charged for simultaneous firing at the
deceased. The number of injuries does not commensurate
with the number of accused party. More so, all the
injuries bear one and the same dimension. It reflects that
it is the job of one person but in order to throw the net
wide, the number of accused has been exaggerated as
three brothers and two unknown accused have been
charged. The empties recovered were not sent in order to
ascertain whether the same were fired from one or
different weapons. What was the reason that this opinion
was not sought by the Investigating Officer, the answer
of that is not available on the record of the case and it can
be presumed that the Investigating Officer was conscious

of the fact that number of the accused has been
-10-

exaggerated and if such report is sought, that would be
detrimental to the case of the prosecution. Thus, there is
element of concealment and exaggeration as well which
further nullifies the mode and manner as set out by the
prosecution. In this respect, guidance is sought from the

case of Mukhtasir_and 5 others. Vs. The State and

another (2017 P.L.R 419) wherein it was held that:-

“From the above assessment of
evidence it is discernable that the
charge made by the complainant party
is exaggerated, as seven number of one
family have been implicated on the
strength of the motive which is more
tempting then blood feud. Reliance is
placed on the case titled “Muhammad
Zaman. Vs. The State and others (2014
SCMR 749) wherein it is held that:-

“The number of assailants in
the circumstances of the case appears
to have been exaggerated. It seems that
most of the persons including the
respondents have been charged
because of previous enmity. The
tragedy may have been enacted by
Mukhtar who has gone into hiding or
Munawar who has been acquitted
because the deceased Shabbir was
alleged to have illicit relation with
their sister, but many who have no
visible nexus with this part of the story
have also been roped in, it is so
because it is customary in this part of
the country to throw wide net of
implication to rope in all those who
could possibly pursue the case or do
something to save the skin of the one
who is innocent or who is actually
responsible for the commission of the
crime. The court, therefore, is required
to exercise much greater care and
-ll-

circumspection while appraising

evidence.”
10. A cross report was referred by learned counsels
for the appellants but in that case, unknown accused are
charged and the place of occurrence also appears to be
different from the one shown in the present case and the
case was filed being untraced by the order of Illaqa
Judicial Magistrate. The same cannot be used by either of
the parties for the proof of guilt or innocence of the

present appellants.

11. For what has been discussed above, we are of
the view that the prosecution case is full of doubts, the
benefit of which should have been given to the

appellants. In the case of Muhammad Akram. Vs. The

State (2009 SCMR 230) it was held that:-

“Tt is an axiomatic principle of law
that in case of doubt, the benefit
thereof must accrue in favour of the
accused as matter of right and not of
grace.”
12. Resultantly, we, accept Criminal Appeal No.73-
D/2015, set aside the impugned judgment of conviction
and sentence dated 13.10.2015 and acquit the appellants

Malik Aamir Sultan, Malik Muhammad Kamran and

Malik Muhammad Farhan of the charges levelled against
-12-

them in this case. They be set free from Jail forthwith if

not required in any other case.

13. So far as Criminal Revision No.16-D/2015 for
enhancement of sentence of the appellants is concerned,
since the appellants have been acquitted of the charges,
therefore, the Criminal Revision has become infructuous

and is dismissed accordingly.

14. Above are the detailed reasons for our short
order of even date.

Announced.
Dt:04.4.2018. JUDGE

Habib/*

JUDGE

(DB)
Hon'ble Mr. Justice Ishtiaq Ibrahim
Hon'ble Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad
