IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
PESHAWAR
Judicial Department].

Cr.Misc.BA No.2598-P/2018

Mazhar Ali son of Shah Hussain,
r/o Faqir Abad District, Peshawar.

Petitioner (s)

Versus
The State etc
Respondents

For Petitioner :- Mr. Shabbir Hussain Gigyani, Advocate.
For State - Mr. Arshad Ahmad, AAG.
For Respondent/complt:- Syed Abdul Fayaz, Advocate.
Date of hearing: 28.01.2019

ORDER

ROOH-UL-AMIN KHAN, _J:- Petitioner Mazhar Ali,
seeks post arrest bail in case FIR No.1297 dated
25.08.2018, registered under sections 367-A, 377 and 511
PPC read with sections 44 and 53 of the Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa Child Protection and Welfare Act, 2010, at
Police Station Faqir Abad, Peshawar, wherein he is
charged for an attempt to commit unnatural offence with
Hamza aged about 13 years.

2. Arguments of learned counsel for the parties heard
and record perused.

3. On legal premises, the Juvenile Justice System
Ordinance, 2000 (XXII of 2000), has been repealed by
promulgation of the Juvenile Justice System Act, 2018
(to be referred hereinafter as the Act of 2018). Under
section 2(b) of the Act of 2018, “Child” has been defined
as a person, who has not attained the age of eighteen years.
Petitioner being below the age of 18 years, thus, falls
within the definition of section 2(b) of the Act of 2018.
According to 6 (3) of the Act of 2018, a juvenile arrested
or detained for commission of a minor or a major offence
for the purpose this Act, shall be treated as if he was
accused of commission of bailable offence. For the sake of
convenience and ready reference the aforesaid section is
reproduced below:-

“S.6 (3) Where a Juvenile is arrested or

detained for commission of a minor or a

major offence for the purposes of this Act,

he shall be treated as if he was accused of

commission of a _ bailable offence.”

(Emphasis supplied).

The “major Offence” and “minor offence” have been
defined in section 2 (m) of the Act of 2018 as under:-

“major offence” means an offence for which

punishment under the Pakistan Penal Code,

1860 (Act XIV of 1860) or any other law for

the time being in force is more than three years

and up to seven years imprisonment with or

without fine”.

“minor offence” means an offence for which

maximum punishment under the Pakistan

Penal Code, 1860 (XLV of 1860) or any other

law for the time being in force is imprisonment

up to three years with or without fine.”
4. Punishment provided for offence under section
44 of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Child Protection and Welfare
Act, 2010, is rigorous imprisonment for a term which may
extend to three years and a fine which may extend to fifty
thousand rupees. Similarly, punishment provided for an
offence under section 53 of the Act (ibid) is an
imprisonment for a term which may extend to fourteen years
and shall not be less than seven years as well as a fine which

shall not be less than ten hundred thousand rupees. Thus
punishments provided for the aforesaid two offences falls
within the definition of minor and major offences,
therefore, under section 6 (3) of the Act of 2018, the
petitioner shall be treated under the said offences as
accused of a bailable offence.

5. As regards section 377 and 367-A_ PPC,
admittedly, there is no specific allegation of commission of
sodomy against the petitioner. In the FIR, he is only
charged for an attempt to commit sodomy upon him.
Complainant is not an eyewitness of the occurrence.
Similarly, no one from the public/people, who allegedly
attracted to the spot, has come forward to substantiate the
version of complainant. Neither, any medico legal report of
the alleged victim is available on file to show any bruises,
scratches or signs of violence on his body nor any torn
clothes of the victim has been taken into possession, so as
to substantiate version of complainant in respect of forcible
drag of the victim, therefore applicability of section 367-A
PPC is a serious debatable question. Besides, in absence of
any proof of penetration which is an essential ingredient to
constitute the offence of sodomy, applicability of section
377 PPC is also a matter of further inquiry. For the sake of
arguments if allegation of complainant is taken into
consideration, it can be a case of an attempt to commit
sodomy. As there is no specific provision under the
Pakistan Penal Code which provides punishment for the
offence of an attempt to commit sodomy, therefore,
recourse shall be made to section 511 PPC, which caters
with such like situation, according to which whoever
attempts to commit an offence punishable by Pakistan
Penal Code with imprisonment for life or imprisonment, or
to cause such an offence to be committed, and in such
attempt does any act towards the commission of the

offence, shall, where no express provision is made by the
Pakistan Penal Code for the punishment of such attempt,
be punished with imprisonment of any description
provided for the offence, for a term which may extend to
one-half of the longest term of imprisonment provided for
that offence or with such fine as is provided for the
offence, or with both. The longest term of imprisonment
provided for the offence under section 377 PPC, is
imprisonment for life or imprisonment of either description
for a term which shall not be less than two years nor more
than ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. One half of
10 years comes to 05 years, which also falls within the
definition of major offence under the Act of 2018. In this
view of the matter, by use of word “Shall” in section 6(3)
of the Act of 2018, the petitioner shall be treated as an
accused of a bailable offence under the said offence.

6. Resultantly, this petition is allowed.
Accused/petitioner is admitted to bail provided he
furnishes bail bonds in the sum of rupees two lac with two
local, reliable and resourceful sureties each in the like
amount to the satisfaction of learned Illaqa Judicial
Magistrate/MOD concerned.

Announced:
28.01.2019

Siraj Afridi P.S.

JUDGE

SB of Mr. Justice Rooh-ul-Amin Khan.
