IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
PESHAWAR,
[Judicial Department].

Writ Petition No.2424-P/2021

Mian Humaun Shah son of Mian Fayaz Ali Shah,
r/o Humaun Shah market GT road, Nowshera cantt.

Petitioner (s)
VERSUS

Naeems Jan son of Naseer Ullah,
t/o Khwaja Town Pachgi road,
Peshawar and others.

Respondent (s)
For Petitioner (s) :- Syed Aziz ud Din Kakakhel, Advocate
For respondents :- Nemo (case in motion).
Date of hearing: 08.09.2021
JUDGMENT

ROOH-UL-AMIN KHAN, _J:-By invoking the constitutional
jurisdiction of this Court under Article 199 of the Constitution of
Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973, Mian Humaun Shah, the
petitioner, seeks issuance of the following writ:-

“To declare the delay in decision of Bail

Before Arrest Application and absence of

respondent No.1/accused from the court in the

said proceedings, as_ illegal, unlawful,

unconstitutional and against the National

Judicial Policy (NJP);

To direct the learned Sessions Judge,

Nowshera/respondent No.4 to decide the Bail

Before Arrest application of
accused/respondent No.1 as early as possible;
and
To direct the learned subordinate

criminal courts of the Province to decide all

kinds of bail matters within a period provided

by the National Judicial Policy (NJP) and the

matter of delay in the BBA application of

respondent No.1 may also be probed into”.
2. In essence grievance of the petitioner is that on his
report case FIR No.984 dated 24.12.2020 u/s 489-F PPC,
was registered against accused-respondent No.1 in Police
Station Nowshera Cantt. On 26.12.2020, accused-
respondent No.1, filed bail before arrest application and
ad-interim pre-arrest bail was granted to him on the same
date by learned Judicial Magistrate/MOD, Nowshera due
to winter vacations. Subsequently, the matter was entrusted
to the learned Additional Sessions Judge-II, Nowshera by
the learned Sessions Judge, Nowshera. Since 26.12.2020,
till date, the BBA application of the accused-respondent
could not decided by the court due to absence of
accused-respondent No.1 on various dates of hearing as
well as his willful and intentional adjournments on one and
the other pretext, hence, this writ petition.
3. During the course of arguments learned counsel
for the petitioner did not press the petition to the extent of

expeditious decision of the pre-arrest bail application of
accused-respondent No.1, as according to him the same
has been withdrawn, however, to the extent of the
remaining relief, he advanced his submissions and
requested for issuance of directions to the learned
subordinate criminal courts for expeditious decision of bail
matters within the period as provided under the NJP.

4. As regards submission of learned counsel for the
petitioner, suffice it to say that the National Judicial Policy
(NJP) 2009 provides specific time for decision of the
criminal cases and bail matters and guidelines for such
disposal. For the sake of convenience and ready reference
relevant part of the NJP, 2009, is reproduced below:-

“EXPEDITIOUS DISPOSAL OF CASES SHORT
TERM MEASURES I. CRIMINAL CASES 1)

qd) In bailable cases, grant of bail is a statutory
right of the accused; therefore, the court before which
the accused appears or is brought may immediately
release him on bail, subject to furnishing of sureties
as provided under section 496 Cr.P.C.

(2) Bail application under section 497 Cr.P.C.
with photocopy of the FIR, duly authenticated by the
Counsel, should be accepted and the court shall call
for record of the case on its own through Naib Court.
(3) In bail matters, notice to State for production
of record shall not exceed beyond 3 days and all the
Provincial Police Officers/Inspectors General of
Police shall issue standing instructions to the
concerned officers to ensure production of record

without delay.

(4) Bail_ applications under section 497 of
Cr.P.C. shall be decided not beyond a period of 3
days by the Magistrate, 5 days by Court of

Sessions and 7 days by the High Court.
(relaxed by Hon’ble the Chief Justice
of this Court vide order dated
5.8.2017, that all the Bail Before
Arrest applications shall be decided
by the learned Sessions Judge/
Additional Sessions Judge within 15
days).
(i) The Court should consider the
principles set forth by the Supreme Court
(1996 S.C.M.R 973) while deciding the bail
petitions of women having suckling babies.
(ii) To overcome the problem of
congestion in Jails, the court should exercise
powers under section 497 Cr.P.C. keeping in
view the principles of grant of bail including
the principle that if the offence does not fall
under the purview of prohibitory clause,
grant of bail is a rule and refusal is an
exception.
(iii) In case bail is rejected, the court
should take all possible measures for
disposal of the case to reduce the chances of
filing of bail petitions before the higher
courts. However, where the accused desires
to move the higher court, the trial court
should provide attested copies of all the
relevant documents to avoid the chance of
requisitioning of original record from the
trial court which hinders the disposal of
case.
(5) Applications for cancellation of bail under
Sub-section (5) of section 497 Cr.P.C. should be
decided within 15 days by the courts including High
Court.

Grant of bail or otherwise is the
discretion of a court and should be
exercised diligently and once a bail is
granted it should not be withdrawn
unless an opportunity is given to the
accused.
(6) In Criminal Cases it is the duty of the
police/investigating agency to submit Challan (Police
Report) within a period of 14 days as contemplated in
section 173 Cr.P.C. In case of non-completion of
investigation, an interim report shall be submitted and
in such cases, the court shall not grant remand beyond
15 days period.
The prosecution should strictly follow the
Order passed by the Supreme Court of
Pakistan in the case of Hakeem Mumtaz
Ahmad and other vs the State (PLD 2002
SC 590) and it should be ensured that in
future challans of criminal cases are
submitted within the stipulated period of
14 days as provided under section 173(1)
Cr.P.C failing which action should be
taken against the concerned officers for
non compliance.
(7) Non-completion of investigation and non-
submission of Challans in statutory period is a major
cause of delays in disposal of cases. Since, Police
plays crucial role in administration of justice,
therefore, the District Police Officers may be asked to
ensure that the police should conclude investigation
and submit Challans within the prescribed period of
14 days. They may be asked that the SHOs who fail
to comply with this statutory provision should be
treated as inefficient officer under the Police Order
and the court may also lodge complaint under section
166 PPC against him. The DPOs should also submit
list of cases in which Challans are still pending for
want of investigation for inspection and passing
appropriate orders by the District and Sessions Judge.
(7-A) Challan of case should be submitted after full
preparation and after ensuring that all witnesses will

be produced as and when required by the courts.”

5. The NJP 2009 also provides specific time period,
mechanism and guidelines for decision of the civil matters as

well, and having binding effect should be strictly followed and
complied with by all the courts of the country. The delay in
disposal of criminal cases, particularly, in bail matters is mostly
observed by this court due to non-cooperation of relevant
stakeholders of justice sector. At numerous occasions the courts
have tried its leveled best to realize strict compliance of the NJP
to the justice sector stakeholders for fulfilling their legal
obligations towards the expeditious disposal of bail applications,
but sometime of no fruitful result. In case of lawyers, the Bar
Council being the Regularity Authority of legal fraternity may
make adherence towards showing their interest in the early
disposal of bail applications. In case, particularly, when the BBA
matter is unnecessarily adjourned by the accused or by the
complainant, the concerned court shall submit report qua reason
of delay to Hon’ble the Chief Justice of this Court through the
Additional Registrar (Judicial) and shall also provide detail of
order-sheets. We do not want to lay more stress on the duties and
responsibilities of the stakeholders of justice sectors except to
point out the leading judgment, handed down by Hon’ble
Supreme Court of Pakistan in case titled, “Nazir Ahmad and
another vs the State and others” (PLD 2014 Supreme Court
241), wherein the principle of propriety and practice in
connection of such like acts have been enunciated. On existence
of NJP 2009, there remains hardly any need to discuss the code
of conduct and etiquettes of legal concerned persons, however,
can emphasize that members of the legal fraternity are expected

to come forward for curbing the imperil and threats to the legal
profession because it is the only segment of the society to
maintain the rule of law and supremacy of the Constitution and
high standard of legal profession. The learned Sessions Judges
are also under laden duties to strictly observe the NJP, 2009 and
in case of non-cooperation of any stakeholder of justice sector,
report the matter to Hon’ble the Chief Justice of this Court
through the Registrar.

6. With the above observation this writ petition is disposed
of accordingly. The Additional Registrar (Judicial) of this court
shall communicate copy of this order to all the Sessions Judges of
the Province to ensure the strict compliance of principles
enunciated in NJP, 2009.

Announced:
8.09.2021

M.Siraj Afridi PS

Senior Puisne Judge

JUDGE

DB of Mr. Justice Rooh ul Amin Khan Hon’ ble Senior Puisne Judge; and
Hon’ble Justice Ms. Musarrat Hilali

