IN THE HIGH COURT OF SINDH, AT KARACHI
Criminal Acquittal Appeal No.174 of 2022

Appellant: Hakim Ali through Mr. Zulfigar Ali Qureshi,
advocate
The State: Mr. Khadim Hussain Khuharo, Additional

Prosecutor General for the State

Respondent: Mst. Sakina Bibi present in person

Date of hearing: 11.10.2023
Date of judgment: 11.10.2023

JUDGMENT

IRSHAD ALI SHAH, J- The facts in brief necessary for disposal

of the instant Criminal Acquittal Appeal are that the private
respondent alleging maltreatment etc. against the appellant, who
happened to be his ex-husband lodged FIR Crime No.58/2020
u/s. 354/337A(i)/504-34 PPC with PS City Court, same on
investigating was recommended by police to be cancelled under
‘BY Class and was cancelled accordingly by learned XIIth-
Judicial Magistrate Karachi, South, vide order dated 30.07.2020
with direction to SHO PS City Court to initiate proceedings u/s.
182 Cr.PC against the complainant, which ought to have been
under PPC. On the basis of such direction, SHO PS City filed
direct complaint before learned XIIth-Judicial Magistrate
Karachi, South, for prosecution of the private respondent u/s.
182 PPC. It was transferred to file of learned Vth-Judicial
Magistrate Karachi, South, who on conclusion of trial, recorded
acquittal of the private respondent vide judgment dated
9.02.2022 which is impugned by the appellant being aggrieved
person before this Court by preferring the instant Criminal

Acquittal Appeal.
2. It is contended by learned counsel for the appellant that
learned trial Magistrate has recorded acquittal of the private
respondent on the basis of improper assessment of the evidence;

therefore, her acquittal is to be examined by this court.

3. Learned Addl. PG for the State and the private respondent
in person by supporting the impugned judgment have sought
for dismissal of the instant Crl. Acquittal Appeal by contending
that the appellant is intending to satisfy his grudge with the

private respondent being his ex-wife.
4. Heard arguments and perused the record.

5. It is settled by now that before initiating proceedings u/s.
182 PPC notice is to be issued against the proposed accused
calling upon him/her to explain his/her position. There is
nothing in order dated 30.07.2020 passed by learned XIIth-
Judicial Magistrate Karachi, South, which may suggest that such
notice was actually ordered to be issued against the private
respondent to explain her position. When confronted with such
omission, learned counsel for the appellant produced photo-stat
copy of a notice, which is said to have been issued against the
private respondent prior to initiating proceeding u/s. 182 PPC
against her. Perusal whereof reveals that it has been issued
against the private respondent on 27.7.2020, it was at-least three
days before the passing of order dated 30.07.2020 by learned
XlIth-Judicial Magistrate Karachi, South. How it happened? No
explanation to it is offered which prima facie suggest some foul
play. Even otherwise, there is nothing on record which may
suggest that such notice was actually served upon the private
respondent. The proceedings u/s. 182 PPC against the private
respondent as said above were initiated on filing of a direct

complaint by SHO PS City. Sub-section (2) to Section 417
requires that, if an order of acquittal is passed on a complainant
then it could be impugned by an aggrieved person with grant of
special leave to appeal. No special leave to appeal is sought for
by the appellant prior to filing of the instant Acquittal Appeal
before this Court; such omission on his part has made the instant

Criminal Acquittal Appeal before this Court to be incompetent.

6. Nothing has been noticed which may suggest that the
acquittal of the private respondent has been recorded by learned
trial Magistrate in arbitrary or cursory manner which may justify

this Court to make interference with it.

7. In case of State and others vs. Abdul Khaliq and others
(PLD 2011 SC-554), it has been held by the Apex Court that;

“The scope of interference in appeal against acquittal is most narrow and
limited, because in an acquittal the presumption of innocence is
significantly added to the cardinal rule of criminal jurisprudence, that an
accused shall be presumed to be innocent until proved guilty; in other
words, the presumption of innocence is doubled. The courts shall be very
slow in interfering with such an acquittal judgment, unless it is shown to
be perverse, passed in gross violation of law, suffering from the errors of
grave misreading or non-reading of the evidence; such judgments should
not be lightly interfered and heavy burden lies on the prosecution to rebut
the presumption of innocence which the accused has earned and attained on
account of his acquittal. Interference in a judgment of acquittal is rare and
the prosecution must show that there are glaring errors of law and fact
committed by the Court in arriving at the decision, which would result into
grave miscarriage of justice; the acquittal judgment is perfunctory or
wholly artificial or a shocking conclusion has been drawn. Judgment of
acquittal should not be interjected until the findings are perverse, arbitrary,
foolish, artificial, speculative and ridiculous. The Court of appeal should
not interfere simply for the reason that on the reappraisal of the evidence a
different conclusion could possibly be arrived at, the factual conclusions
should not be upset, except when palpably perverse, suffering from serious
and material factual infirmities”.

8. In view of the facts and reasons discussed above, the
instant Criminal Acquittal Appeal fails and it is dismissed

accordingly.

JUDGE

Nadir*
