IN THE HIGH COURT OF SINDH, KARACHI

1. |Spl. Cr. Acquittal Appeal |The State through Director, DG, 1&l-Customs, Karachi Vs.
No. 12/2021 Muhammad Younus Dawood
2. |Spl. Cr. Acquittal Appeal |The State through Director, DG, |&l- Customs,
No.13/2021 Karachi Vs. Muhammad Younus Dawood
3. |Spl. Cr. Acquittal Appeal [The State through Director, Directorate General of |&|
No.14/2021 Customs, Karachi Vs. Muhammad Younus Dawood
4. |Spl. Cr. Acquittal Appeal |The Director, D.G 1&l Customs, Karachi Vs. Huzaifa
No.16/2021 Sachwani & others
5. |Spl. Cr. Acquittal Appeal [The Director, D.G, 1&l Customs, Karachi Vs. Muhammad
No.17/2021 Rizwan & others
6. |Spl. Cr. Acquittal Appeal |The Director, D.G. 1&l Customs, Karachi Vs. Mohammad
No. 18/2021 Zubair Gheewala
7. |Spl. Cr. Acquittal Appeal |The Director, D.G. 1&l-Customs, Karachi Vs. Muhammad
No.19/2021 Uzair & others
8. | Spl. Cr. Acquittal Appeal |The Director, Directorate General of |&l Customs, Karachi
No.20/2021 Vs. Muhammad Amin Mithani & others
9. | Spl. Cr. Acquittal Appeal |The Director, Directorate General of |&l Customs, Karachi
No.21/2021 Vs. Muhammad Amin Mithani & others
10. |Spl. Cr. Acquittal Appeal |The Director, Directorate General of 1&1 Customs,
No.22/2021 Karachi Vs. Muhammad Amin Mithani & others
For the Appellants: Mr. Mehmood Alam Rizvi along with
Jazib Aftab, Advocates.
For the Respondents: Mr. Zain A. Jatoi along with Mr.
Muhammad Mustafa Younus,
Advocates

(in Spl. Cr. Acq. Appeal Nos. 16 to 22 of 2021)

Syed Muhammad Abbas Hyder, Mr.
Fahim Zia and Mr. Sawan, Advocates
for Respondents.

(in Spl. Cr. Acq. Appeal Nos. 12, 13 & 14 of 2021)

Mr. G.M Bhutto, Assistant Attorney

General.
Dates of hearing: 30.01.2023, 06.02.2023 & 06.03.2023
Date of Judgment: 29.5.2023

JUDGMENT

Muhammad Junaid Ghaffar, J: These Special Criminal Acquittal
Appeals under Section 185-F of the Customs Act, 1969, have been filed
by the State through The Director, Directorate General of Intelligence &

Investigation-Customs, Karachi, impugning separate orders, all dated

Page 1 of 10
Spl. Cr. Acquittal Appeal Nos. 12 to 14 & 16 to 22 of 2021

23.02.2021. Though all orders have been passed on the same date,
however, there are two sets of identical orders (with minor difference in facts)
which have been passed by the Special Judge (Customs, Taxation and
Anti-Smuggling), Karachi. One set of orders has been passed in Special
Criminal Acquittal Appeal Nos. 12 to 14 of 2021; whereas, the order(s) in
Special Criminal Acquittal Appeal Nos. 16 to 22 of 2021 is the second set

of same orders.

2. Heard learned Counsel for the Appellants as well as Respondents /
accused and perused the record. It appears that the Appellant lodged
different FIRs against the Respondents under Sections 156(1), (14), (14-
A) of the Customs Act, 1969 on the allegation that the goods meant for
Karachi Export Processing Zone, which is an exempt area, were being
used unauthorisedly in a tariff area, resulting in loss of revenue to the
exchequer, whereas, it was further alleged that the modus operandi for
making payment of the goods in question to the shippers abroad
amounted to money laundering. During pendency of the trial, the
respondents filed applications under Sections 265-K Cr.P.C and sought
acquittal on the sole ground that the Appellant lacks jurisdiction to initiate
the proceedings and to register FIR under the Customs Act, 1969. The
learned Trial Court was pleased to allow such applications and the two set
of identical orders dated 23.02.2021 as noted hereinabove and passed in

the above two sets of Appeals reads as under: -

In Spl. Cr. Acq. Appeal Nos. 12, 13 & 14 of 2021

“(3) Heard and perused. In this matter the complainant has alleged violation of SRO
655(1)/2006 and taking its undue advantage. The clause (ix) and (x) of the said SRO
provide as under:-

(ix) The manufacturer-cum-importer shall communicate to the concerned Collector
of Customs in writing about the consumption of imported sixty days of
consumption of goods. In case of non-consumption within one year from the
date of import, the importer shall pay the customs duty and other taxes
involved or obtain extension from the Collector of Customs giving plausible
reasons for a reasonable period.

(x) In case the manufacturer-cum-importer does not provide information regarding
consumption or otherwise of the imported goods within a period of one year of
import or such extended period as allowed by the Collector or if otherwise
deemed necessary, the records of manufacturer- cum-importer shall be audited
by any person or agency duly designated by the Engineering Development
Board and Federal Board of Revenue. If upon audit, consumption of goods is
not found satisfactory, the Collector of Customs shall initiate proceedings for
the recovery of leviable customs-duty and other taxes besides penal action
under the relevant provisions of the law in force:

(4) Thus, in case of misuse of SRO concerned Collector of Customs is a competent
authority even to initiate proceedings for recovery of levidable duties & taxes including
initiation of criminal proceedings and not the present complainant who figures nowhere in
entire SRO.

(5) The same complainant i.e. Directorate General of Intelligence and investigation-
FBR, Regional Office, Karachi lodged some other FIRS on the same sets of allegations
against different importers among these FIRs, in two FIRs the consignments were

Page 2 of 10
Spl. Cr. Acquittal Appeal Nos. 12 to 14 & 16 to 22 of 2021

detained and assessed by the complainant. In rest of the FIRS the consignments were
already released after completing all legal codal formalities and now reassessment is
made by the complainant on framing allegation of mis-declaration.

(6) It is pertinent to mention that these importers had earlier filed Constitution
Petition bearing No. D-296 of 2019, D-231 of 2019, D-610 of 2019, D-611 of 2019, D-
1145 of 2019 and D-3203 of 2019 which were disposed of by Hon'ble High Court on 01-
10-2019. The very initiation of the criminal proceedings before this Court is shaken by the
said order whereby it was declared that detention of the consignment of the Petitioners at
Port by the Customs Authorities which were admittedly meant for consumption in
Balochistan Engineering Works and without allowing such consignment to reach the
manufacturer of the goods was without lawful authority and in violation of directives issued
by the Federal Board of Revenue in this regard. It has further been observed in para-1 of
the order dated 01-10-2019 that the letters issued or action taken against the Petitioners
by the Directorate General of Intelligence and investigation-FBR, Karachi are also illegal
and without lawful authority.

(7) Very astonishingly instant FIRs are lodged on 22-10-2019 after disposal of the
constitution petition. In this matter goods have been released now the allegation of
evasion of duties and taxes by mis-declaration of quality of steel is unsubstantiated. The
entire case is based on conjecture and surmises. This court is unable to understand for
determination of quality of iron & steel products, presence of goods is a prime condition,
whereas admittedly goods have already been consumed.

(8) Needless to mention that the authority to examine and assess the consignment
in respect of GD which has been filed for Balochistan Engineering Works vested with the
Collectorate Customs, Port Qasim only whereas the complainant only has the authority to
check the consignment at entry point. Except two FIRS even there are no consignment to
be examined as already been consumed. In these matters the complainant has acted in
total complete violation of the power as no power under Section 32 and 32-A are vested
with them except when the consignment was validly seized under Section 168 of the
Customs Act, 1969. The seizure of consignment must also been legal and not in the way
in which it has been done by the complainant. Those consignments have already been
released and now the Directorate General of Intelligence and investigation-FBR, Regional
Office, Karachi cannot re-assess its value as being without jurisdiction.

(9) Under such circumstances, there is no probability of the conviction of the
accused. It will be sheer wastage of time to frame charge, record evidence and to proceed
with the case |, therefore, acquit the accused from the charge under section 265-K
Cr.P.C. He is present on bail. His bail bond stand cancelled & surety is discharged.

(10) Needless to mention that the competent authority would be not precluded to
initiate criminal proceedings if finds any such crime.”

In Spl. Cr. Acq. Appeal Nos. 16 to 22 of 2021.

“(3) Heard and perused. The same complainant i.e. Directorate General of
Intelligence and investigation-FBR, Regional Office, Karachi lodged some other FIRS on
the same sets of allegations against different importers among these FIRS, in two FIRS
the consignments were detained and assessed by the complainant. In rest of the FIRS the
consignments were already released after completing all legal codel formalities and now
reassessment is made by the complainant on framing allegation of mis-declaration.

(4) It is pertinent to mention that these importers had earlier filed Constitution
Petition bearing No. D-296 of 2019, D-231 of 2019, D-610 of 2019, D-611 of 2019, D-
1145 of 2019 and D-3203 of 2019 which were disposed of by Hon'ble High Court on 01-
10-2019. The very initiation of the criminal proceedings before this Court is shaken by the
said order whereby it was declared that detention of the consignment of the Petitioners at
Port by the Customs Authorities which were admittedly meant for Export Processing Zone
and without allowing such consignment to reach the Export Processing Zone was without
lawful authority and in violation of directives issued by the Federal Board of Revenue in
this regard. It has further been observed in para-1 of the order dated 01-10-2019 that the
letters issued or action taken in respect of the consignment meant for Export Processing
Zone by the Directorate General of Intelligence and investigation-FBR, Regional Office,
Karachi are also illegal and without lawful authority.

(5) Very astonishingly instant FIRs are lodged on 17-10-2019 after disposal of the
constitution petitions. In this matter goods have been released now the allegation of
evasion of duties and taxes by mis-declaration of quality of steel is unsubstantiated. The
entire case is based on conjecture and surmises. This court is unable to understand for
determination of quality of iron & steel products, presence of goods is a prime condition,
whereas admittedly goods have already been consumed.

Page 3 of 10
Spl. Cr. Acquittal Appeal Nos. 12 to 14 & 16 to 22 of 2021

(6) Needless to mention that the authority to examine and assess the consignment
in respect of GD which has been filed for Export Processing Zone vested with the
Collectorate Customs, EPZ only whereas the complainant only has the authority to check
the consignment at entry point. Except two FIRs even there are no consignment to be
examined as already been consumed. In these matters the complainant has acted in total
complete violation of the power as no power under Section 32 and 32-A are vested with
them except when the consignment was validly seized under Section 168 of the Customs
Act, 1969. The seizure of consignment must also been legal and not in the way in which it
has been done by the complainant. Those consignments have already been released and
now the Directorate General of Intelligence and investigation-FBR, Regional Office,
Karachi cannot re-assess its value as being without jurisdiction.

(7) Under such circumstances, there is no probability of the conviction of the
accused persons. It will be sheer wastage of time to frame charge, record evidence and to
proceed with the case |, therefore, acquit all the accused persons from the charge under
section 265-K Cr.P.C. They are present on bail. Their bail bond stand cancelled & sureties
are discharged.

(8) Needless to mention that the competent authority would be not precluded to
initiate criminal proceedings if finds any such crime.”

3. From perusal of the above impugned orders, it appears that these
two sets of orders; though differently worded as to the pertinent facts, but
are identical as to reasons in arriving to the conclusion that proceedings
be quashed. The entire basis of passing the impugned orders and
allowing the quashment applications is dependent on an order dated
01.10.2019 passed by a learned Division Bench of this Court in C.P No.
D- 296 of 2019 (Steel Vision (Pvt.) Ltd. V Federation of Pakistan & Others) and
other connected matters. The said petitions were filed by the present
Respondents when goods in question were detained by the present
Appellant and some proceedings were being initiated; whereas, the action
of the Appellants was challenged on the ground that they lacked
jurisdiction. The learned Division Bench was pleased to decide these

Petitions by way of a short order on 1.10.2019 and it reads as under: -

“For the reasons to be recorded later on, instant petitions are disposed of in
the following terms:-
(1) The detention of subject consignment(s) of the petitioner(s) at Port by the
Customs Authorities, which were admittedly meant for Export Processing
Zone and without allowing such consignments to reach the Export Processing
Zone, was without lawful authority and in violation of directives issued by the
Federal Board of Revenue (FBR) in this regard. Accordingly, the letters
issued or action taken in respect of consignments meant for Export
Processing Zone by the Directorate of Intelligence and Investigation are also
illegal and without lawful authority.
Since the consignment(s) of the petitioner(s) have now been duly examined
through joint inspection, whereafter a joint report dated 14.07.2019 has been
furnished, concerned Adjudication Collectorate may proceed in respect of
such consignments in accordance with law and may conclude the
adjudication proceedings after providing opportunity of being heard to the
petitioner, preferably, within a period of one month from the date of receipt of
this order.
The Directorate of Intelligence and Investigation, however, will be at liberty to
initiate lawful proceedings against the petitioner(s), irrespective of the
aforesaid adjudication proceedings by the concerned Collectorate (Export
Processing Zone) provided, there is concrete material available with them,
which may require their intervention and preparation of contravention, if any,

S

(3

Page 4 of 10
Spl. Cr. Acquittal Appeal Nos. 12 to 14 & 16 to 22 of 2021

however, strictly in accordance with law, whereas, the relevant SROs as well

as directives issued by the FBR in this regard and the case law on the subject

shall also be taken into consideration.

Petition(s) stands disposed of in the above terms along with listed
applications.

4. It appears that the Petitions were disposed of by way of the above
short order and it was held that the detention of the consignments was
without lawful authority; whereas, during pendency of the petitions, the
goods were jointly examined and in respect thereof, certain directions
were issued. However, as to the action of the present Appellant, it was
observed that they are at liberty to initiate lawful proceedings against the
Respondents provided that there is concrete material available with them,
however, such action should be strictly in accordance with law and the
directions of FBR in this regard as well as the case law shall also be taken
into consideration. It appears that based on such order, though
paragraphs Nos. 1 & 2 were complied with partly; however, in respect of
paragraph-3 as above, the impugned FIRs were lodged and proceedings
were initiated. It further appears that thereafter reasons were recorded
and while doing so, the learned Division Bench placed reliance on the
case of Saadat Khan Vs. Federation of Pakistan & others (2014 PTD
1615), (Paras 15 & 16 thereof); however, it is a matter of fact that such
judgment in the case of Saadat Khan (supra) was impugned by the
department and Supreme Court was pleased to record certain
observations as to the findings in Para 15 & 16 of the Saadat Khan’s case
(Supra). The said observation of the Supreme Court in Civil Appeal No.20
of 2018 dated 31.01.2019 (Director Directorate General of Intelligence and

Investigation, FBR v Saadat Khan & others) reads as under: -

“2. Clearly, the observations made in paragraph 16 reproduced above are not
germane to the grounds of the decision made by the impugned judgment of the learned
High Court. Consequently, they do not constitute the ratio decidendi of the judgment and
are merely remarks made as obiter dicta. Therefore, these dicta do not have binding
effect. Be that as it may, if a genuine contest about the jurisdiction of the appellant is
raised before us, rather than academically as in the present case, we shall take it up then
and decide the same.

3. This appeal is disposed of in the above terms.”

5. From perusal of the above observations of the Honourable
Supreme Court, it clearly reflects that insofar as the finding recorded in
Saadat Khan’s case (supra) (more specifically in Para 16 thereof) is concerned,
it was held not to constitute any ratio decidendi and be treated as obiter
dicta; hence do not have any binding effect. It may also be of relevance to

note that the case of Saadat Khan’s case (supra) was decided against the

Importer / Petitioner, whereas, while dismissing the petition in Para 16

Page 5 of 10
Spl. Cr. Acquittal Appeal Nos. 12 to 14 & 16 to 22 of 2021

thereof, some observation was made finding was recorded in respect of
jurisdiction of the present Appellant under the Customs Act, 1969, in
respect of imported goods. However, the said reasoning and or finding
has not been approved by the Supreme Court in the Appeal filed by the
present Appellants. Resultantly, insofar as the said judgment in Saadat
Khan’s case (supra) case is concerned, Para 16 thereof is of no relevance
and no more a binding precedent. In view of such position, the reasons so
recorded in support of the judgment dated 01.10.2019 in C.P No. D- 296
of 2019 (Steel Vision (Pvt.) Ltd. V Federation of Pakistan & Others) by the learned
Division Bench in the case of respondents by placing reliance on Para 16
as above could not be ipso facto made a binding precedent; therefore,
reliance of the learned trial Court solely on the judgment dated
01.10.2019; whereby, certain observations were recorded as to the
authority and jurisdiction of the present appellant appears to be based on
misreading and misapplication of the said judgment. As to any other
finding in the impugned orders, it may further be held that insofar as the
learned Trial Court is concerned, the same was not competent to give a
declaration as to the very jurisdiction of the Appellant under the Customs
Act, 1969. If that had been the case, then the learned Division Bench
would not have recorded its observation, as at Para-3 of the short order
and would have quashed the proceedings on its own. Therefore, the
learned Trial Court was misdirected in passing the impugned Order(s). It
further appears that in same impugned order(s), it has been further
observed that it is needless to mention that the competent authority would
not be precluded to initiate criminal proceedings if it finds commission of
any such crime. It is not understandable as to how such an observation
can be made by the trial Court while quashing the proceedings on an
application under Section 265-K Cr.P.C. If proceedings have been
quashed on the ground that the Appellant had no jurisdiction to initiate the
case(s) in question, then perhaps no such observations could have been
recorded. It only draws an inference that the trial Court was by itself
unclear as to the jurisdiction of the Appellant. Moreover, it is settled law
that the proceedings are not to be quashed under Section 265-K Cr.P.C
as a matter of routine and it is to be resorted to only in exceptional
circumstances, which in the present facts do not appear to be available.
The learned Trial Court while allowing the applications in question was
also misdirected to observe that there are certain violations of FBR’s
directions committed by the Appellant, as this would not ipso facto be a
ground to quash proceedings under Section 265-K Cr.P.C; rather a trial

ought to have been carried on and only then there could have been a case

Page 6 of 10
Spl. Cr. Acquittal Appeal Nos. 12 to 14 & 16 to 22 of 2021

of acquittal on merits on these grounds. To this extent, prosecution /
appellants ought to have been given a chance to prove their case as

recorded in the FIRs.

6. There is another aspect of the matter which perhaps has skipped
the attention of the Trial Court. It appears that after passing of judgment
dated 01.10.2019 in C.P No. D- 296 of 2019 (Steel Vision (Pvt.) Ltd. V
Federation of Pakistan & Others) and other connected matters, the accused /
Respondents had also filed another set of petitions before the High Court
bearing CP No. D-6451 of 2019 and other connected matters and the said
petitions were disposed of by consent on 7.2.2020. It is of much relevance
to note that by that time impugned FIR’s were already registered after
passing of order dated 1.10.2019 as above; and despite this, the learned
Division Bench was not persuaded to pass any orders regarding the
legality or otherwise of the said FIR’s. The learned trial Court,
notwithstanding that subsequently, the matter was once again brought
before the High Court, wherein even the said FIR’s, registered
subsequently after the above order had also been challenged seeking
quashment (except in one case) but despite this when these petitions were
disposed of with consent, the following orders was passed in respect to
the FIR’s.

4. Since the FIRs have already been registered, whereas, the same have
been challenged in all these petitions except in C.P. No. D-6451/2019 for
being without jurisdiction, besides being malafide as per petitioners,
therefore, the petitioners, who directly approached this Court without
surrendering before the trial Court, are directed to join the investigation,
cooperate with the prosecution, and to surrender themselves before the
trial Court and shall furnish surety in the sum of Rs.100,000/- (Rupees
one hundred thousand only) each before the trial Court within seven
days from the date of this order, whereafter, they shall be regulated by
the trial Court in accordance with law, however, no harassment shall be
caused to the petitioners by the Customs Authorities. Petitioners will be
at liberty to file appropriate proceedings / application(s) before the
learned trial Court for seeking appropriate relief in respect of the criminal
proceedings, including quashment of FIR(s) under section 265-K,
Cr.P.C. in accordance with law.

7. From the aforesaid order it reflects that though it was permitted that
the Respondents / Petitioners can file quashment applications under
Section 265-K Cr.P.C. before the trial court; however, even if such
observation is not recorded by the High Court, such application can
always be filed by an accused and has to be dealt with in accordance with

law. However, the learned Bench was not inclined to pass any order or

Page 7 of 10
Spl. Cr. Acquittal Appeal Nos. 12 to 14 & 16 to 22 of 2021

record any observations as the legality of the FIR’s in question, though it
has been challenged on the same grounds on the basis of which
subsequently the impugned orders have been obtained. Therefore, when
the learned Bench of the High Court had not passed any order or
judgment on this aspect of the case, notwithstanding their own judgment
dated 01.10.2019 in C.P No. D- 296 of 2019 (Steel Vision (Pvt.) Ltd. V
Federation of Pakistan & Others), then how come the trial Court could hold
otherwise by placing reliance on the earlier judgment. What the trial Court
has failed to take note of is that after passing of the above order dated
7.2.2020, mere reliance on the order passed earlier dated 01.10.2019 in
C.P No. D- 296 of 2019 (Steel Vision (Pvt.) Ltd. V Federation of Pakistan & Others)
for quashment of the proceedings was not a correct approach as it was
never directed or desired by the Court. What the trial Court ought to have
done is decided the said applications independent of the observations of
the High Court as recorded in its earlier order as above. This has not been
done and there is no law which has been discussed; nor any other legal
argument has been raised or decided while passing the impugned orders;
rather the entire order has been passed by placing reliance on the
observations of the High Court in its judgment dated 01.10.2019 in C.P
No. D- 296 of 2019 (Steel Vision (Pvt.) Ltd. V Federation of Pakistan & Others). This

approach does not appear to be correct or in accordance with law.

8. As to filing and entertaining an application under Section 265-K
Cr.P.C, it may be of relevance to observe that though an accused can be
acquitted under Sections 249-A and 265-K Cr.P.C., at any stage of the
proceedings, if the Court considers that the charge is groundless or that
there is no probability of conviction; however, each case must be judged
on its own special facts and circumstances, whereas, if there is remote
possibility of conviction then of course courts are not empowered to
invoke the said provisions’. It is also settled law that an acquittal at
intermediary stage either under Section 249-A or 265-K Cr.P.C., cannot
be equated with an acquittal after a full-fledged trial post evidence; and
therefore, such acquittal would have not the same sanctity as that of an
acquittal after trial; hence, the presumption of double innocence, as is
ordinarily available to such an accused while deciding an acquittal appeal
will not be available or applicable to such intermediary acquittal. Per
settled law an application under section 265-K Cr.P.C., should not

normally be pressed into action for decision or fate of a criminal case

1 Per Sardar Tariq Masood,J: (Model Customs Collectorate Islamabad v Aamir Mumtaz Quershi-2022 PTD
1683)

Page 8 of 10
Spl. Cr. Acquittal Appeal Nos. 12 to 14 & 16 to 22 of 2021

especially when apparently there is probability of conviction after recording
evidence’. It is always desirable that as and when an application is moved
for quashment of a case in terms of section 265-K Cr.P.C., for which
though there is no bar and can be moved at any stage of the proceedings,
yet the fact and circumstances of the prosecution case will have to be kept
in mind and considered in deciding the viability or feasibility of filing of
such an application at any particular stage’. Per settled law, uusually a
criminal case should be allowed to be disposed of on merits after
recording of the prosecution evidence, statement of the accused under
section 342, Cr.P.C., recording of statement of accused under section
340(2), Cr.P.C. if so desired by the accused persons and hearing the
arguments of the counsel of the parties and that the provisions of section
249-A, section 265-K and section 561-A of the Cr.P.C should not normally
be pressed into action for decision of fate of a criminal case’. If, in fact, an
offence had been committed justice required that it should be enquired
into and tried, whereas, if the respondents are not guilty, they have a right
to be declared as honorably acquitted by a competent Court. On the other
hand, if the evidence against the respondents discloses a prima facie case
then justice clearly requires that the trial should proceed according to
law’. Reliance may also be placed on the cases of Azam Malik’,

Muhammad Sharif’ and Ghulam Faroog®.

9. In the case of DG Coast Guards’ it was held by learned Judge of the
Baluchistan High Court that lodging of FIR with the Special Court Customs
by the Commandant of Battalion instead of Authorised Officer would not
vitiate the trial. Similarly, in the case of Muhammad Nawaz" the issue
before the Supreme Court was that whether the learned Judge of the High
Court of Sindh was justified in quashing the proceedings and FIR under
Section 561-A Cr.P.C. on the ground that the officer of Customs who
lodged the complaint / FIR before the Special Judge (Customs & Taxation)
was not competent to do so in terms of Section 32 of the Customs Act,
1969, and it was held that it was not a fit case in which the learned Judge
in Chamber should have invoked inherent jurisdiction of the High Court

under Section 561-A Cr.P.C. directly even before the prosecution

2 Bashir Ahmed v Zafar UI Islam (PLD 2004 SC 298)

3 The State v Raja Abdul Rehman (2005 SCMR 1544)

4 The State v Raja Abdul Rehman (2005 SCMR 1544)

5 Ghulam Muhammad v Muzammal Khan (PLD 1967 SC 317)
© PLD 2005 SC 686

7 PLD 1999 SC 1063

8 2008 SCMR 383

9 1992 PCr.LJ 1795

10 2002 SCMR 634

Page 9 of 10
Spl. Cr. Acquittal Appeal Nos. 12 to 14 & 16 to 22 of 2021

produced its evidence as the case involved defraudation of crores of
rupees of public money and it was a fit case wherein the prosecution
should have been given full opportunity to produce evidence before any
conclusion could have been recorded. The case in hand has great
similarity in facts and the observations of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in

the case of Muhammad Nawaz (Supra) are to be followed respectfully.

10. In view of hereinabove facts and circumstances, this Court is of the
view that the trial Court ought to have allowed the prosecution to lead
evidence and prove their case including that of jurisdiction for registration
of the case(s) in hand, whereas, there was no occasion for the trial court
to pass the impugned orders and allow the applications under Section
265-K Cr.P.C. and quash the proceeding in question; hence, such orders
cannot be sustained and or upheld. Accordingly, the same are hereby set
aside. Consequently, these appeals against acquittal are allowed; the
cases are remanded to the trial Court with direction to record evidence
and decide the case(s) on merits in accordance with law. The respondents
/ accused are directed to attend / approach the trial Court on 02.06.2023,
whereas, the issue of granting them bail afresh or otherwise shall be

decided by the trial Court in accordance with law.
11. All listed Appeals are allowed in the above terms.

Dated: 29.05.2023

JUDGE

Ayaz

Page 10 of 10
