IN THE HIGH COURT OF SINDH, CIRCUIT COURT,
HYDERABAD

Criminal Bail Application No. S-102 of 2019

Abdul Rehman

Applicant through: Mr. Khadim Hussain Leghari Advocate

The State

Respondent through: Mr. Shahid Ahmed Shaikh, Deputy
Prosecutor General, Sindh

Date of hearing: 08.3.2019

Date of decision: 08.3.2019

ADNAN-UL-KARIM MEMON, J. Through instant bail

application, Applicant Abdul Rehman seeks post arrest bail in
F.IL.R No.464/2018 registered under Section 381-A, 34 PPC at

Badin Police Station.

2. Brief facts of the prosecution case are that Complainant
Malik Shahid Hussain Deputy Manager, State Life Insurance
Hyderabad Zone lodged the aforesaid F.I.R against the Applicant
with the allegations that on 30.12.2018, he was informed by Karim
Bakhsh Soomro, Area Manager and Mehboob Ali Cashier that the
Applicant had informed them that when he came in the office and
saw that lockers were broken. On such information, he found
Rs.2,143,683/- missing rather stolen. Inquiry in the matter was
conducted, thereafter FIR was lodged. Investigating Officer
recorded statements of prosecution witnesses arrested and
interrogated the Applicant on 31.12.2018; got recovered alleged
amount on the same day. Finally, Investigating Officer submitted
Charge Sheet on 16.2.2019 before the trial court. Applicant filed
bail application No. 2 of 2019 before the learned trial Court i.e. 1st
Civil Judge & Judicial Magistrate, Badin, which was dismissed

vide order dated 09.1.2019. He being aggrieved by the aforesaid
decision assailed the same before learned 224 Additional Sessions
Judge Badin who too declined the Bail vide order dated 15.1.2019,

now the Applicant has approached this court on 26.1.2019.

3. Mr. Khadim Hussain Leghari learned counsel for the
Applicant has argued that the Applicant is quite innocent and has
falsely been involved in the alleged crime. It is contended that due
to personal grudge of the complainant, he has been booked in the
present case. It is further contended that keys of locker are said to
be misplaced on 04.4.2018 from one Karim Bakhsh Soomro, Area
Manager and Incharge, but neither such entry of missing of keys is
kept at police station nor keys of the safe locker were changed by
the officials of the office, hence the alleged recovery of amount is
foisted upon the Applicant to save themselves from the
departmental action; that no prima facie case is made out against
the applicant. Counsel further contended that there is an
inordinate delay of one and half day in lodging the FIR, which
creates doubt in the prosecution case, hence the case of the
Applicant requires further inquiry; that the basic ingredients of
alleged offence u/s 381-A PPC are missing which requires further
inquiry; that the alleged offence does not fall within the prohibition
contained under section 497 (1) Cr.P.C. He lastly prayed for grant

of post-arrest bail to the applicant.

4. Mr. Shahid Ahmed Shaikh, Deputy Prosecutor General,
Sindh has vehemently opposed the bail application and argued the
recovery has been effected from the applicant, therefore no
concession of bail can be extended to him at this stage. He lastly

prayed for rejection of bail.
5. I have considered the submissions of the learned counsel for
the Applicant, learned Deputy Prosecutor General for the State and

examined the record minutely.

6. Theft is defined under Section 378 PPC, that whoever,
intending to take dishonestly any movable property out of the
possession of any person without that person's consent, moves
that property in order to such taking, is said to commit theft.
Tentative assessment of the record shows that none has witnessed
the theft of Rs.2,143,683/- from the purported lockers and no
evidence to that effect is available on record, therefore, the
insertion of section 381-A PPC appears not only unjustified but
also speaks about mala fide of the police, prima-facie, when none
of the ingredients of offence is punishable with imprisonment
falling within the prohibitory limb of section of 497 Cr.P.C then,
refusing to grant bail to the applicant would be highly unjustified.
However the observations made in this order are tentative in
nature, which shall not prejudice the case of either party at the
trial. Before parting with this order, it is necessary to observe that
in cases of this nature, not falling within the prohibition contained
in section 497 Cr.P.C, and invariably grant of bail is refused on
flimsy grounds. This practice should come to an end because the
public, particularly accused persons charged for such offences are
unnecessarily burdened with extra expenditure and this Court is
heavily taxed because bail applications in hundreds are piling up
in this Court and the diary of the Court is congested with such like
bail applications. This occurrence is growing enormously, thus,
cannot be lightly ignored as precious time of the Court is wasted in

disposal of such matters. The honorable Supreme Court has
already set forth the parameters with regard the grant or refusal of
bail since long however, the principle in two cases, out of many are
directly attracted to the present case, are mentioned herein once
again. In the case of Mansha Khan v. The State (1977 SCMR 449) it
was held as follows:-
“_ §.497 Crl.P.C. read with section 325/34 PPC—
Grievous hurt — Bail — Offence u/s 325 PPC (repealed)
being punishable with 7 years R.I. is not one of such
offences where bail is to be refused by reason of
prohibition contained in section 497 Cr.P.C.— held, bail
in such cases, hence, not to be refused merely because
of offence being non-bailable— Any strong reason being
absent to refuse bail, Courts below, held, not properly
exercised their discretion in refusing bail on basis of
number of injuries suffered by victim of attack.”
7. In the case of Tariq Bashir V. The State (PLD 1995 SC 34) the
honorable Supreme Court has taken notice of stock of prevailing
circumstances where under-trial prisoners are sent to judicial
lock-up without releasing them on bail in non-bailable offences
punishable with imprisonment of less than 10 years and held
that “grant of bail in such offences is a rule and refusal shall be
an exception, for which cogent and convincing reasons should be
recorded.” While elaborating exceptions, albeit it was mentioned
that if there is a danger of the offence being repeated if the
accused is released on bail, then grant of bail may be refused
but it is further elaborated that such opinion of the Court shall
not be founded on mere apprehension and self-assumed factors
but the same must be supported by cogent reasons and material
available on record and not to be based on Surmises and
artificial or weak premise. Even otherwise to ensure that the
accused may not repeat the same offence, if released on bail,
sufficient surety bonds shall be obtained through reliable

sureties besides the legal position that repetition of the same

offence would disentitle the accused to stay at large as bail
granting order may be recalled in that event, therefore, such a
ground should not be an absolute bar in the way of grant of bail.
It may be noted that there is a sky high difference between jail
life and free life. If the accused person is ultimately acquitted in
such cases then, no kind of compensation would be sufficient
enough to repair the wrong caused to him due to his
incarceration. It is settled principle of law that once the
Legislature has conferred discretion on the Court to exercise
jurisdiction in particular category of offences without placing any

prohibition on such discretion.

8. Once this Court has held in categorical terms that grant of
bail in offences not falling within the prohibitory limb of section
497 Cr.P.C. shall be a rule and refusal shall be an exception
then, the subordinate Courts should follow this principle in its
letter and spirit because principles of law enunciated by this
Court under Article 203 of the Constitution of Islamic Republic
of Pakistan, 1973 is binding on all subordinate Courts. My view
is supported by the decision rendered by the Honourable
Supreme Court in the case of The State v. Syed Qaim Ali Shah
(1992 SCMR 2192) and the famous case of Khan Asfandyar Wali

and others v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 2001 SC 607).

9. I expect the Courts below to adhere to these binding
principles in future and not to act mechanically in the matter of
granting or refusal of bail because liberty of citizen is involved in
such matters, therefore, same should not be decided in vacuum

and without proper judicial approach.

10. Accordingly, this bail application is allowed. The applicant

is granted bail subject to his furnishing solvent surety in the
sum of five hundred thousand rupees (Rs.500,000/-) and P.R.

bond in the like amount to the satisfaction of learned trial Court.

11. These are the reasons of short order dated 08.3.2019.

JUDGE

Irfan Ali
