ORDER SHEET
IN THE HIGH COURT OF SINDH, KARACHI

Criminal Bail Application No.1445 of 2020

1. For orders on office objection at A
2. For hearing of bail application

01.04.2021

Mr. Muhammad Asif Javed, advocate for applicant/ accused.
Ms. Azra Hammad, advocate for complainant.
Mr. Talib Ali Memon A.P.G. Sindh.

Salahuddin Panhwar, J.-After dismissal of pre-arrest bail, applicant

Muhammad Asif-ur-Rehman has approached this Court for the same relief.
Heard learned counsel for the respective parties, the interim pre-arrest bail
granted to the applicant/accused vide order dated 24.09.2020 is recalled,
consequently, the instant bail application is dismissed for the following

reasons.

2. The applicant is nominated in Crime No.160/2020, under Sections
420/506/34/468/471 PPC registered at PS Aram Bagh, Karachi by

complainant Ali Muhammad.

3. Learned counsel for the applicant, inter alia, contended that applicant
is innocent and has been falsely implicated in an offence which was alleged
committed in the year 2018; that such delay in registration of the FIR has not
been furnished by the complainant; that dispute as alleged in the FIR is of
civil nature; that the story concocted by the complainant in the FIR was just
to harass and humiliate the applicant; that no specific role has been
assigned to the applicant. Lastly, it is submitted that the interim pre-arrest
bail granted to the applicant may be confirmed. In support of his
submissions he relied upon case laws reported as 2005 P.Cr.L.J 89, 2010
P.Cr.L.J 545, 2005 MLD 494, PLD 1995 S.C. 34, 1993 PCr.L.J 446 and 2007
MLD 372.
Page 2 of 3

4, Conversely, learned Additional Prosecutor General Sindh duly
assisted by learned counsel for the complainant opposed the instant bail
application on the ground that applicant cheated the complainant by
presenting himself as owner of the property, however, the real owner got
recorded his statement, wherein he denied execution of any Sale
Agreement; that delay in lodging of the FIR has been furnished by the
complainant, therefore, it is prayed that instant bail application may be

dismissed.

5. Perusal of record shows that applicant presented himself as owner
of the flat, which he sold out to the complainant after taking a huge
amount as advance. Muhammad Asif, the real owner of the flat has also
filed his statement before this Court wherein he categorically stated that
applicant illegally and unlawfully sold out his flat to complainant while
using his name and the applicant has also filed fake documents before the
police. It is settled principles of law that grant of pre-arrest bail is an
extraordinary remedy, rooted into equity, to protect the honour and
freedom of the innocent in criminal cases actuated by abuse of process of
law. Reliance is placed upon the case reported as Abdul Aziz Memon
Vs. The State (2020 SCMR 313). Learned counsel for the applicant has
failed to establish that the prosecution is based upon mala fides, ulterior
motives and on the other hand, the applicant in his bail application has
admitted his signatures on the said Sale Agreement. The case law relied
upon by learned counsel for the applicant is on different footing, even
otherwise, the precedents in bail matters are of no help to a party, as it

varies from case to case depending upon the facts of each case.

7. For the above stated reasons, I have come to the conclusion that
applicant has failed to make out a case for grant of extra-ordinary relief of
pre-arrest bail at this stage. I, therefore, recall the interim pre-arrest bail
granted to the applicant vide order dated 24.09.2020. Consequently, this bail

application is dismissed.
Page 3 of 3

8. Needless to observe that the above observations are tentative in
nature and the trial Court shall not be influenced, in any manner, while

deciding the case on merits.

JUDGE

Sajid
