IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
PESHAWAR,
Judicial Department].

Crl. Appeal No.785-P/2017

Muhammad Nawaz son of Abdul Nawab,
r/o Nawa Kala Jehangira Nowshera.

Appellant (s)

VERSUS

The State etc

Respondent (s)
For Appellant :- Mr. Shabbir Hussain Gigyani, Advocate.
State - Mr. Mujahid Ali Khan AAG.
For Respondent :- Malik Anwar ul Hag, Advocate.
Date of hearing: 16.10.2019

JUDGMENT

ROOH-UL-AMIN KHAN, J:- This appeal under section
410 Cr.P.C., filed by Muhammad Nawaz, the appellant, is
directed against the judgment dated 14.11.2017, passed by
the learned Sessions Judge/ASJ at Nowshera, whereby the
appellant having been found guilty of committing murders
of his sister, namely, Mst. Maria and one Farhad, has been
convicted under section 302 (b) PPC and sentenced to
undergo imprisonment for life on two counts as well as to
pay Rs.1,00,000/-, as compensation to LRs of each
deceased in terms of section 544-A Cr.P.C. and in default
of payment thereof to undergo 06 months S.I. further on
each count in case FIR No.227 dated 05.05.2017,

registered under section 302 PPC at Police Station Akora
Khattak, District Nowshera. Benefit of section 382-B
Cr.P.C. has been extended to the appellant.

2. The prosecution case is that on 05.05.2015 at 1626
hours, complainant Jamroz Khan (PW.3), in company of
dead bodies of his brother Farhad and Mst. Maria
deceassed, reported to Shahid ASI (PW.10), in presence of
Mst. Hussan Zeba (PW.2) (mother of Mst. Maria
deceased), in DHQ hospital Nowshera Kalan to the effect
that some 15/20 days prior to the occurrence Mst. Maria
deceased eloped with Farhad deceased. On the day of
occurrence, the two deceassed were called by appellant
Noor Muhammad (brother of Mst. Maria deceased) to his
house, situated in Nawab Kala Jehangira for the purpose of
settlement of the matter, where he committed their murders
with firearm. The incident is stated to have been witnessed
by people present at the spot. Elopement of Mst. Maria
deceased with Farhad deceased has been alleged as motive
behind occurrence. His report was recorded in the shape of
Murails Exh.PA/1 which was verified by Mst. Hussan
Zeba (PW.2), on the basis of which FIR Exh.PA, was
registered against the appellant. Shahid ASI (PW.10),
prepared injury sheets and inquest reports of the two
deceased Exh.PW.10/1 to Exh.PW.10/4 respectively, and
shifted their dead bodies of Mst.Maria and Farhad to the
mortuary where, Dr. Erum and Dr. Farman Ali conducted

their autopsy, respectively.
3. Ihsan ur Rehman Khan S.I (PW.5), conducted
investigation in the case, who as per his assertion,
proceeded to the spot and prepared site plan Exh.PB at his
own. During spot inspection he secured blood through
Cotton Exh.P.1 and Exh.P.2 from the places of the
deceased vide recovery memo Exh.PW.5/1. Vide recovery
memo Exh.PW.5/2, he took into possession 07 crime
empties of 30 bore Exh.P.3 from the crime spot and sealed
the same in parcel. Bakht Sher Khan SHO (PW.1),
arrested the appellant in a raid over his house and prepared
his arrest card Exh.PW.1/1 and from his possession
recovered a 30 bore crime pistol. To this effect he
registered a separate case FIR No.228 dated 05.05.2015
under section 15 KP Arms Act, 2013 Police Station Akora.
The appellant was handed over to Inshan ur Rehman
(PW.5), who produced him before the learned Judicial
Magistrate for his physical remand. He made additions
with red ink Exh.PC in the site plan Exh.PB on the
pointation of the appellant. He also took into possession
the crime pistol bearing No.FF.1653 Exh.P.4, recovered
from the appellant, produced by Shahid Khan MHC vide
recovery memo Exh.PW.5/1. He also took into possession
a Cot having bullet marks vide recovery memo
Exh.PW.5/6, recorded statements of the PWs under section
161 Cr.P.C and vide recovery memo Exh.PW.5/8 he took

into possession the last worn bloodstained garments of the
deceased Exh.P.5 to Exh.P.6 and a phial spent bullet, sent
by the doctors. He draw snapshots of the deceased and the
crime spot marked as Exh.P.9 to P.18; sent the
bloodstained articles, the crime pistol and empties to the
FSL, reports whereof are Exh.PZ/1 and Exh.PZ/2. On
completion of investigation he handed over case file to the
SHO, who submitted challan against the appellant.

4. On receipt of challan by the learned trial Court, the
appellant was summoned and formally charge sheeted to
which he pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. To prove its
case, the prosecution examined as many as ten witnesses.
After closure of the prosecution evidence, statement of the
appellant was recorded under section 342 Cr.P.C., wherein
he denied the prosecution allegations and professed his
innocence. He, however, declined to be examined on oath
under section 340 (2) Cr.P.C. or to produce evidence in
defence. On conclusion of trial, the learned trial Court,
after hearing both the sides convicted and sentenced the
appellant, as mentioned above, hence, this appeal.

5. We have heard the exhaustive arguments of
learned counsel for the parties and perused the record with
their able assistance.

6. Record depicts that the occurrence has taken place
at 1430 hours in the house of Mst. Hussan Zeba (PW.2),
but it has been reported at 1625 hours i.e. after a delay of

about 02 hours for which neither any explanation, much
less plausible, has been furnished by complainant Jamroz
Khan (PW.3) nor by Mst. Hussan Zeba (PW.2). No doubt,
the appellant has been directly charged by the complainant
in his initial report for double murder and we are mindful
of the fact that substitution of single accused in a murder
charge is a rare phenomenon, but at the same time the
Hon’ble Supreme Court has also laid down the law through
various dictums that to put the rope around the neck of an
accused charged singularly, there must be ocular account
of unimpeachable character, trustworthy and confidence
inspiring, corroborated by circumstantial evidence. In case
titled, “Dr. Israr_ul Haq vs Muhammad Fayyaz and
another” (2007 SCMR 1427), the Hon’ble Supreme Court
has ruled that substitution of innocent person when a single
accused is named in a murder case is a rare phenomenon
but it depends from case to case.

7. A look over the FIR and statement of Jamroz Khan
(PW.3), reveal that he is not eyewitness of the occurrence.
In his statement he has deposed that on the eventful day he
was on duty when received information about the
occurrence, upon which he reached his house and from his
house he along with his mother reached hospital where he
lodged report in presence of Mst. Hussan Zaiba (PW.2).
No doubt, Mst. Hussan Zeba (PW.2) has also verified
report of the complainant but perusal of her statement

would reveal that she is also not an eyewitness of the
occurrence. She has deposed that on the eventful day on
the report of fire shots, she rushed to the Baithak of her
house and saw the two deceased murdered and their dead
bodies were lying on a Cot. In cross-examination she
admitted that she has not witnessed the appellant while
committing the offence; that after 30/45 minutes of the
occurrence she informed Jamroz Khan Complainant
(PW.3), who reached the spot, wherefrom they shifted the
dead bodies of the deceased to the hospital. Contrary,
Jamroz Khan has deposed that after 15/20 minutes of the
occurrence he received information during his duty, on
which he proceeded to his house and accompanied his
mother to the hospital. No other inmate of the house of
Mst. Hussan Zaiba, has come forward to furnish ocular
account of the occurrence. In view of statements of
complainant and rider of Murasila, the occurrence is
un-seen and the prosecution case is entirely based on the
circumstantial evidence in the shape of recovery of blood
of the deceased from the spot, their last worn bloodstained
garments and positive Serologist report Exh.PZ in respect
thereof, which admittedly proves the crime spot to be the
same as alleged by the prosecution. Similarly, autopsy
reports of the deceased also proves the unnatural death of
the two deceased with firearm, however, these pieces of
evidence do not tell the name(s) of the culprit(s). The main

question for determination is that who committed these
murders? To answer the above query, we searched the
prosecution evidence, but did not find an iota of direct
evidence to the effect that the appellant had invited the
deceased to his house and then committed their murder in
the Baithak. The only circumstance that the appellant is
brother of Mst. Maria deceased would not be sufficient to
prove the guilt of appellant because report of complainant
is based on hearsay. According to FIR, Mst. Hussan Zeba
was present in DHQ hospital Nowshera along with dead
bodies of Mst. Maria and Farhad deceased, where
complainant charged the appellant in his report on the
ground that he being aggrieved on elopement of his sister
Mst. Maria with Farhad deceased, invited the two deceased
to his house on the pretext of settlement of the matter and
committed their murder. Through, statement of
complainant has been verified by Mst. Hussan Zeba
(PW.2), but complainant has not uttered a single word
about the source of information regarding culpability of the
appellant. It is also manifest from Murasila that before
arrival of complainant, Mst. Hussan Zeba (mother of
Mst. Maria deceased) was already present in the hospital
but she did not lodged the report. During trial,
Mst. Hussain Zeba recorded his statement wherein she has
admitted the fact that on elopement of her daughter
Mst. Maria deceased, the appellant and her another son,

namely, Munir were annoyed. She also admitted the fact
that they resides in the house jointly. She deposed that at
the time of firing she was offering prayer and thereafter
went to the Baithak, where she saw the dead bodies of her
daughter Mst. Maria and son-in-law Farhad. She straight
formally stated that she has not seen the appellant on
committing the offence. She may be termed as natural
witness of the occurrence, but her admission to the effect
that another brother of the appellant was also annoyed on
elopement of Mst. Maria deceased and that she has not
seen the appellant on committing murder of the deceased,
creates serious doubt in prosecution case. The above
mentioned star witness of the prosecution has neither
supported the FIR nor has posed herself as an eyewitness
of the occurrence, while the complainant reached the
hospital when the dead bodies of the deceased were already
shifted to the hospital by unknown person.

8. So far as recovery of 7 crime empties of 30 bore
from the spot and a 30 bore crime pistol No.FF.1653 from
possession of the appellant and positive FSL report
Exh.PZ/1 in respect thereof is concerned, Bakht Sher Khan
SHO (PW.1), in cross-examination has deposed that he
arrested the appellant along with pistol and to his effect he
scribed Daily Diary No.29 dated 05.05.2015, wherein he
has not mentioned the pistol number recovered from the
appellant. He further deposed that he had only mentioned

30 bore pistol and five live rounds with a magazine in the
aforesaid daily diary, whereas, pistol No.FF.1653 was
mentioned by him in the Murasila and recovery memo. He
admitted it correct that such like pistols are easily available
in the Arms and ammunitions market in each city.

9. It is amazing, rather ridiculous that arrest of the
appellant has been shown during a raid on his house on the
same day of occurrence i.e. 05.05.2015 and that too,
keeping the crime weapon in his possession. It is beyond
the imagination and comprehension of a prudent mind that
a culprit after committing murder of two persons would
dare to wait in his house for the arrival of police to offer
his arrest. A normal human conduct in such like situation is
quite contrary to the story of prosecution as the culprit(s)
after committing offence used to go into hiding so as to
avoid arrest. Thus arrest of the appellant in his house along
with crime weapon soon after the occurrence is nothing but
a dramatic scene staged by the police just to show their
efficiency and this fact can be well established from the
fact that the alleged crime empties and pistol have been
sent to the FSL on 14.05.2015 i.e. after eleven days of the
occurrence/recovery. No explanation, much less plausible
has been furnished by the prosecution that where the pistol
and empties remained during the period of eleven days and
whether these were in safe custody of a responsible

Officer. In absence of any explanation, it can be safely held
10

that during the interregnum period there are chances of
manipulation of alleged crime pistol and empties by the
local police. Besides, no independent witness has been
associated with the process of arrest of the appellant and
alleged recovery of the crime pistol from his possession.
There is another pinching aspect of the case regarding
arrest of the appellant recovery of the pistol from fold of
his trouser inside his house at 08.00 p.m. The Investigation
Officer left the Police Station for spot at 1740 hours, where
he prepared the site plan of his own, followed by
recoveries from the spot, but in the same house could not
arrest the appellant, while Bakht Sher SHO (PW.1), on
getting information at 2000 hours, came to the spot and
arrested the appellant along with crime pistol. The arrest
card of the appellant is silent about the place of his arrest
and recovery of pistol from his possession. The mode and
manner of arrest of the appellant being not appealable to a
prudent mind coupled with the fact of sending the alleged
crime empties and the pistol to the FSL with a delay of
eleven days, makes the evidentiary value of this piece of
circumstantial evidence highly doubtful, hence, would not
be sufficient for recording conviction of the appellant, that
too, in case of capital charge. An iota of circumstantial
evidence of the standard that all the circumstances so inter-
linked, making out a single chain, an unbroken one, where

one end of the same touches the dead body and the other
11

the neck of the accused, has not been brought on record by
the prosecution to prove the guilt of the appellant. It is
settled law that any missing link in the chain in case of
circumstantial evidence would destroy the prosecution case
and shall render the same unreliable for recording a
conviction on a capital charge. Reference is made to the
cases of Muhammad Aslam vy. The State (PLD 1992 SC
254) and Ch. Barkat Ali v. Major Karam Elahi Zia 1992
SCMR 1047).

10. As stated above, recovery of blood from the spot,
the last worn blood stained garments of the deceased and
unnatural death of the deceased with firearm as per
postmortem reports, could only prove the factum of
murders of the deceased with firearm at the place as
alleged by the prosecution, but never tell (s) the name (s) of
the culprit(s)/killer(s). Such pieces of evidence are always
considered as corroborative evidence and are always taken
along with direct evidence and not in isolation as held by
the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Riaz Ahmed’s case (2010
SCMR_ 846), Ijaz Ahmed’s case (1997 SCMR_ 1279 and
Asadullah’s case (PLD 1971 SC 541).

11. For what has been discussed above, we are firm in
our view to hold that the prosecution has miserably failed
to prove the guilt of the appellant through cogent and
confidence inspiring evidence direct or circumstantial

evidence beyond shadow of reasonable doubt. It is settled
12

law that prosecution is duty bound to prove its case beyond
shadow of reasonable doubt and if any single and slightest
doubt is created, benefit of the same must go to the
accused. Guidance in this regard can be derived from case

titled, “Tariq Pervaz Vs the State” (1995 SCMR 1345

and case titled, “Muhammad Akram Vs the State (2009
SCMR_230) and Faryad Alis 20 case (2008 SCMR
1086).

12. The learned Trial Court has failed to appreciate the
evidence in its true perspective and has arrived at an
erroneous conclusion by holding the appellant guilty of the
offence, therefore, the impugned judgment is liable to be
set aside. Accordingly, this appeal is allowed. Conviction
and sentence of the appellant recorded through impugned
judgment dated 14.11.2017, are hereby set aside. He is
acquitted of the charge leveled against him in the instant
case. He be set at liberty forthwith if not confined in any
other case.
These are the reasons of our short order of even

date, which is reproduced below:-

“For reasons to be recorded later, we allow this

appeal, set-aside the conviction and sentence of

appellant-convict Muhammad Nawaz son of Abdul

Nawab, recorded under section 302 (b) PPC by

learned Sessions Judge/ASJ at Nowshera vide

judgment dated 14.11.2017, in case FIR No.227
13

dated 05.05.2015, registered under section 302 PPC
at Police Station Akora Khattak and hereby acqit him
of the charge in the cited case. He be set at liberty

forthwith, if not confined in any other case”.

Announced:

16.10.2019

M.Siraj Afridi PS
JUDGE
JUDGE

DB of Hon’ble Mr. Justice Rooh ul Amin Khan; and
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Ishtiaq Ibrahim.
