JUDGMENT SHEET

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
PESHAWAR
(Judicial Department)

Crl. Appeal No.554-P/2014
Date of hearing:

Appellant (s) :

Respondent (s) :

JUDGMENT

ASSADULLAH KHAN CHAMMKANTI, _J.- This

appeal is directed against the judgment dated 24.09.2014,
passed by learned Trial Court/ Additional Sessions
Judge-IV, Kohat, whereby appellants (1) Muhammad Khan
and (2) Shah Nawaz, have been convicted under section 13
Arms Ordinance, 1965 and sentenced to undergo 03 years
S.I. each. They have been further convicted under section
417 PPC and sentenced to undergo 06 months S.I. each.
However, co-accused Wali Khan and Wagar Abbas, were
acquitted.

2. The prosecution case as unfolded in First
Information Report is that, on 26.02.2012, on receipt of
information from Abdul Qiyas HC Incharge Highway
Checkpost, qua smuggling of arms and ammunitions via

motorcar, Arman Gul SHO alongwith other police officials

rushed to Highway Checkpost. At 15.05 hours, a motorcar
bearing registration No.FDW-810, coming from Dara
Adam Khel side was intercepted. Its driver disclosed his
name as Wagar Abbas and a person sitting beside him in
front seat as Wali Khan. In its rear seat, two persons
wearing veils, on search by a lady constable were
discovered to be male, who on query disclosed their names
as Muhammad Khan and Shah Nawaz (appellants convicts
herein). On search of a polythene bag in possession of
Muhammad Khan,twelve 30 bore pistols alongwith fixed
and spare chargers and a pen pistol were recovered while
from possession of accused Shah Nawaz, a Kalashnikove
and a stain gun were recovered. The accused/appellants
were arrested on the spot alongwith acquitted co-accused.
Arman Gul SHO drafted murasila Exh.Pw.5/2 on the basis
of which FIR No.186 dated 26.02.2012, was registered
against the accused under sections 13 and 14 Arms
Ordinance, 1965 and Ss.417 and 419 PPC, in Police
Station Muhammad Riaz Shaheed, Kohat. He also took
into possession the recovered arms and ammunitions vide
recovery memo Exh.PW.5/1 and examined the same
through Armourer vide report Exh.PW.4/1.

3. On completion of investigation, challan was

submitted against the accused before the learned Trial

Court, where they were formally charge sheeted to which
they pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. To prove its case
prosecution examined six witnesses. After closure of the
prosecution evidence, statements of the accused were
recorded under section 342 Cr.P.C., wherein they denied
the prosecution allegations and professed their innocence.
They, however, declined to be examined on oath under
section 340 (2) Cr.P.C. or to produce evidence in defence.
On conclusion of trial, learned Trial Court, after hearing
both the sides, convicted the appellants as mentioned
above, however, acquitted co-accused Wagar Abbas and
Wali Khan, hence, this appeal by the convicts.

4. Arguments heard and record perused.

5. I deem it appropriate to mention here that
during pendency of the instant appeal, appellant-convict
Muhammad Khan absconded, as such his sureties were
proceeded under section 514 Cr.P.C. My this judgment
shall only govern the case of appellant Shah Nawaz.

6. It was the duty of the prosecution to prove
the alleged recovery through cogent and confidence
inspiring evidence beyond shadow of reasonable doubt,
particularly, by producing and exhibiting the arms and
ammunitions allegedly recovered from possession of

appellant Shah Nawaz before the learned Trial Court

during evidence, but neither the arms nor the veil allegedly
wearing by the appellant at the time of his arrest have been
produced/exhibited before the Trial Court, in absence
whereof, mere allegation of recovery in the FIR, would not
be sufficient to prove the guilt of the appellant. The learned
Trial Court by squarely over sighting this important aspect
of the case reached to an erroneous concluding by holding
the appellant guilty of the offence. The non-production and
exhibition of the case property has totally shattered the
entire edifice of the prosecution case, benefit of which is to
be extended to the appellant.

6. Accordingly, I while partially allowing this
appeal to the extent of appellant Shah Nawaz, hereby set
aside set aside his conviction and sentence, recorded vide
impugned judgment dated 24.09.2014 and hereby acquit
him of the charges levelled against him. He is on bail, his
bail bonds stands cancelled and sureties are absolved from
liability of bail bonds.

7. This appeal to the extent of appellant
Muhammad Khan is kept pending and shall be restored/
taken up again, on his arrest. Perpetual non-bailable
warrant of arrest be issued against him through SHO Police

Station concerned.

8. The Additional Registrar (Judicial) of this
Court is directed to send copy of this judgment to the
Director General Prosecution Khyber Pakhtunkhwa,
Peshawar, for observing the irresponsible and careless
attitude of the Additional Public Prosecutor associated with
the prosecution of the instant case, who despite the fact
that such like

phe etete 0 cases alongwith ocular account
of the Seizing Officer and marginal witnesses to the
recovery memo, are always proved by production and
exhibition of the recovered contraband before the learned
Trial Court during prosecution evidence, did not bother to
exhibit the recovered arms and ammunitions as well as the
veils, particularly, in the statement of Abdul Qayas HC
(PW.2), marginal witness to the recovery memo
Exh.PW.2/1, as the Seizing Officer/complainant was
abandoned being dead, which ultimately, resulted in
acquittal of the accused. The irresponsible conduct
demonstrated by the APP reflects that either he is
incompetent or dishonest. Any step taken in the matter, be

intimated to this Court.

Announced
26.10.2015

JUDGE

*M Siraj Afridi PS. D
*M Siraj Afridi PS. D
*M Siraj Afridi PS. D
7. For what has been discussed above, Suo motu
notice given to accused Shakir stands withdrawn. He is
admitted to bail on already existing bail bonds, on merits.
Since this court has already directed expeditious
conclusion of trial while dealing with the bail petition of
co-accused Farman, therefore, office is directed to send the
record to the quarter concerned within two days, positively.
announced:

19.10.2015

JUDGE

*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

10
*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

11
*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

12
