JUDGMENT SHEET

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
PESHAWAR
(Judicial Department)

Jail Cri. Appeal No.64-P/2012
Date of hearing:

Appellant (s) :

Respondent (s) :

JUDGMENT

ASSADULLAH KHAN CHAMMKANT, J.- Through

the instant Jail Criminal Appeal, appellant Muhammad
Alam alias Muhammad Ali, has questioned the judgment
dated 07.12.2011, passed by learned Trial Court/ Sessions
Judge, Peshawar, whereby the appellant having been found
guilty of committing the Qatl-e-Amd of Riaz and
his wife Mst. Fauzia, has been convicted under section 302
(b) PPC and sentenced to undergo imprisonment for life as
Ta’azir qua murder of Riaz deceased and to pay a sum of
Rs.2,00,000/-, as compensation in terms of $.544-A Cr.P.C.
to LRs of the deceased or in default thereof, to undergo 06
months S.J. further. He has been further convicted under
proviso-III to Section 308 PPC for murdering his wife Mst.

Fauzia deceased and _ sentenced to pay  Diyat

to LRs of the deceased. Benefit of $.382-B Cr.P.C. has
been extended to him.

2. Brief account of the prosecution case is that on
20.08.2008 at 23.25 hours, complainant Mst. Nasreen
(PW.3), reported to Gul Shahzada S.I. on the spot that on
the fateful day her parents had proceeded to Rawalpindi.
She alongwith her brothers and sisters including her
deceased brother Riaz, was present in her house. Her
brother Riaz, who had illicit relation with Mst. Fauzia,
went out of the house to see her in the house. Muhammad
Alam (appellant-convict herein)/ the husband of
Mst. Fauzia present on the roof top of his house duly
armed with firearm, on seeing Riaz in his house his house,
came down, first opened fire at his wife Mst. Fauzia and
then chasing her brother Riaz, committed his murder near
the door of her house with firearm; that both the deceased
died on the spot. Thereafter the appellant duly armed,
entered her house, and forcibly took her out, however, let
her free in the way. Illicit relation of the two deceased with
each other has been alleged as motive behind the incident.
In addition to complainant, her other brothers are stated to
have been witnessed the incident.

3. Report of the complainant was reduced into

writing in the shape of murasila Exh.PA by Gul Shahzada

SI, consequent whereupon, FIR No.645 dated 20.08.2008

Exh.PA was registered against the appellant.

4. Dr. Arshad Hussain (PW.6) conducted autopsy

on the dead body of deceased Riaz on 21.08.2008 at 8.30

a.m. and found the following injuries on his person:-

1. Firearm entry wound on left side of face 2.5 x 2
cm in size, one cm from the left angle of mouth,
4 cm below the left eye with tattoing on the left
face and left years in an area of 6/3 cm.

2. Firearm exit wound on right back of neck 2 cm
in size, 1 cm from mid line and 4cm above the
back of neck.

3. Tattoing on the left wrist 4/3 cm in size.

Opinion: According to his opinion, the deceased died to

vital neck structure due to firearm.

Lady Dr. Fauzia Habib (PW.8) conducted
postmortem examination of deceased Mst. Fauzia on
21.08.2008 at 8.30 a.m. and found the following injuries
on her body.

1. Firearm entry wound in middle of forehead on
mid line, 1/1 cm with tattooing on face 9/8 cm,

entry wound 2 cm above root of nose.

2. Firearm entry wound on outer aspect (lateral) of
left thigh 1/0.5 cm, 18 cm below iliac crest, 27
cm above knee.

3. Firearm exit wound on right side back of skull,
4/2 cm, 3 cm from mid line, 10 cm below and
behind right ear.

4. Firearm exit wound on inner aspect (Medial)
thigh 2/1 cm, 4 cm below left gluteal fold and 18
cm above knee.

5. Tajmir Shah S.I. proceeded to the spot and

prepared site plan Exh.PB, on the pointation of

eyewitnesses. During spot inspection, he secured blood
from the places of two deceased and 2 empties of 30 bore
pistol vide recovery memos Exh.PC and Exh.PC/1. He also
took into possession bulb Exh.P.3, installed on outer door
of the house of complainant and another bulb Exh.P.4
installed in the veranda of the house of the accused vide
recovery memo Exh.PC//2. Vide recovery memo

Exh.PW.2/1, he took into possession the last worn

garments of the deceased, sent the bloodstained articles to

the FSL, report whereof is Exh.PW.7/2, recorded
statements of the PW, initiated proceedings under sections

204 and 87 Cr.P.C. against the appellant and on

completion of investigation submitted challan in terms of
S.512 Cr.P.C. against the appellant.

6. On arrest of the appellant, supplementary
challan was submitted against the appellant before the
learned Trial Court, where he was formally charge sheeted,
to which he pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. To prove
its case prosecution led its evidence. After closure of the
prosecution evidence statement of the appellant was
recorded under section 342 Cr.P.C. wherein he denied the
prosecution allegations and professed his innocence. He,
however, declined to be examined on oath or to produce
evidence in defence. On conclusion of trial, learned Trial
Court, after hearing both the sides, convicted and
sentenced the appellant, as mentioned above, hence, this
appeal.

7. Learned counsel for the appellant argued that the
occurrence is unseen as evident from the statement of
solitary alleged eyewitness Mst. Nasreen complainant; that
there is neither any ocular nor circumstantial evidence,
much less tangible and concrete, to prove the guilt of the
appellant, therefore, the findings of the learned Trial Court
qua the guilt of the appellant being based on surmises and

conjectures, are liable to be set at naught.

8. None appeared on behalf of the complainant
despite service. The learned AAG while supporting the
impugned judgment, sought dismissal of the appeal.
9. Heaving heard the arguments and going through
the evidence on record, we may observe that occurrence is
nocturnal having taken place at 22.20 hours in the month
of August. Though, in her report Mst. Nasreen
complainant in addition to her, has mentioned her other
brothers and sisters to have witnessed the incident but none
of them appeared in the witness box. Only complainant
appeared as a solitary eyewitness. Cross-examination of
her statement is of much significance which squarely
shatters the whole edifice of the prosecution case. We
would like to reproduce the same as under for ready
reference:-

“The occurrence has taken place at night time.

It was dark. At the time of occurrence we all

brothers and sisters were present in the house

and taking evening meal. It is correct that

Mst. Fauzia is not known to me. I do not know

if she resided in our street. I don’t know if my

deceased brother and Fauzia had any relationship

of any kind or not. We are pathans and do not go

outside the house. Similarly, at the time of

occurrence I had not gone out of the house.
Facts attributed to me in the report
Exh.PW.3/1 were told to me by the police. It is
correct that accused was not previously
known to me”.
In light of the statement of the alleged eyewitness
Mst. Nasreen there remains no case of the prosecution.
However, for the sake of arguments if we presume that she
on account of compromise outside the court might have
extended concession to the appellant, even then we have
strong reservations qua her stance. She alleged in her
initial report that she was present inside her house when
her deceased brother Riaz went out to see Mst. Fauzia lady
deceased/wife of the appellant in her house. The two
deceased have been done to death on two separate places,
one inside the house and the other near the door of his
house. The two houses are separate, having separate
boundary walls and entrance door, as shown in the site
plan. Question arises as to how Mst. Nasreen the alleged
eyewitness, noticed the husband of lady deceased i.e. the
appellant on the roof top of his house where no source of light
has been shown and how she observed all the subsequent
events of his coming down, committing the murder of his wife
first and then chasing her brother Riaz followed by his

murder near the door of her house.

*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

Similarly, how her other brothers and sister present in their
own house, witnessed the occurrence. All these disturbing
aspects of the case are sufficient for believing that
Mst. Nasreen had not witnessed the incident.

10. Over and above, we do not find any
circumstantial evidence, much less of high value and
degree, to connect the appellant with the commission of
crime and incompatible with his innocence. It is settled
principle of law that prosecution is primarily bound to
establish the guilt of an accused through evidence of
unimpeachable character beyond reasonable doubt and if
any reasonable doubt arises in the prosecution case benefit
of the same must be extended to the accused not as a
matter of grace or concession but as a matter of right. In
the instant case, the prosecution evidence is pregnant with
doubts and as per to golden principle of benefit of doubt;
one substantial doubt would be enough for acquittal of the
accused. The rule of benefit of doubt is essentially a rule
of prudence, which cannot be ignored while dispensing
justice in accordance with law. Conviction must be based
on unimpeachable evidence and certainty of guilt and any
doubt arising in the prosecution case, must be resolved in
favour of the accused. The said rule is based on the maxim

“it is better that ten guilty persons be acquitted rather than

one innocent person be convicted” which occupied a
pivotal place in the Islamic Law and is enforced strictly in
view of the saying of the Holy Prophet (PBUH) that the
“mistake of Qazi (Judge) in releasing a criminal is better
than his mistake in punishing an innocent”.

11. For what has been discussed above, the
learned Trial Court failed to appreciate the available
evidence in its true perspective and thus reached to
erroneous conclusion by holding the appellant guilty of the
offence, therefore, we by allowing this appeal, set aside his
conviction and sentences recorded by the learned Trial
Court vide impugned judgment dated 07.12.2011 and
hereby acquit him of the charges. He be set at liberty
forthwith, if not required in any other case.

12. Though we have set aside the conviction and
sentences of the appellant, however, for future guidance of
the learned Trial Judge, we would like to dilate upon
section 302 PPC and 308 PPC, as in the instant case, he
besides convicting the appellant under section 302 (b) PPC
for Qatl-i-amd of deceased Riaz, also convicted him under
section 308 PPC for murder of lady deceased Mst. Fauzia
(the wife of the appellant) and sentenced him under
proviso-III to Section 308 PPC to pay Diyat. Section

308 PPC contemplates punishments for Qatl-i-Amd not

10

liable to Qisas or where the qisas is not enforceable under
section 307 (c ) PPC. The first punishment provided for
Qatl-i-Amd under section 302 (a) PPC is death as Qisas.
Section 304 PPC contemplates proof of qatl-i-amd liable
to Qisas, in the following form, namely,

(a) the accused makes before a _ court

competent to try the offence a voluntary and

true confession of the commission of offence;

or

(b) by the evidence as provided in Article 17

of the Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984.

(2) The provision of sub-section (1) shall,

mutatis mutandis, apply to a hurt liable to

qisas.
In the instant case, neither the appellant had made before
the Trial Court a voluntary and true confession of the
commission of offence nor the procedure and formalities
of Article 17 of the Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984, have
been complied with, as provided under section 304 PPC.
Thus, in absence of the proof of qatl-i-Amd liable to qisas
as enunciated under section 304 PPC, the learned Trial
Court proceeded on wrong premises while recording
conviction under proviso-III to section 308 PPC. Had the

case been proved against the appellant in light of proof of

11

qatl-i-Amd liable to qisas, as provided under section 304
PPC, then to the extent of murder of Mst.Fauzia being the
wife of the appellant, falling within the ambit of section
307 PPC, which speaks about the cases in which qisas for
qatl-i-Amd shall not be enforced, the learned Trial Court
would be justified to inflict punishment under proviso-III
to Section 308 PPC. The findings of the learned Trial
Judge are self contradictory because on the one hand he
convicted the appellant for murder of deceased Riaz, under
section 302 (b) PPC and inflicted punishment of
imprisonment for life as Ta’azir upon him, which means
that the learned Trial Judge was satisfied that the
prosecution has not proved the case against the appellant
within the meaning of S. 304 PPC, but on the other hand,
he astonishingly inflicted the sentence of payment of Diyat
under Proviso-III to section 308 PPC in respect of murder
of the lady deceased Mst. Fauzia (wife of the appellant).
13. The Additional Registrar (Judicial) of this
Court is directed to circulate copy of this judgment among
the Additional Sessions Judges, of District Peshawar for
future guidance, with intimation to this Court, as the then
learned Trial Judge, has been now retired.

Announced
07.10.2015

JUDGE

JUDGE

*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

12
*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

13
*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

14
