IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
PESHAWAR,
[Judicial Department].

Cr.Mise.BA No.3793-P/2020

Muhammad Hanif son of Muhammad Nawaz,

r/o Bara Qamber Khel.
Petitioner (s)
VERSUS
The State
Respondent (s)
For Petitioner (s) :- Ms. Zohra Durrani, Advocate
For State - Mr. Arshad Ahmed AAG.
Date of hearing: 25.01.2021
ORDER

ROOH-UL-AMIN_ KHAN, _J:-Petitioner Muhammad
Hanif, seeks post arrest bail in case FIR No.548 dated
28.11.2020, registered under section 9 (d) Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa Control of Narcotic Substances Act, 2019, at
Police Station Jalozai, District Nowshera.

2. According to First Information Report (FIR), on
receipt of spy information qua presence of the petitioner
along with narcotics and waiting for his customers at “Dak
Ismaeel Khwar”, Asif Momen Khan SHO along with other
police officials on 28.11.2020 at 1550 hours reached the
spot and apprehended the petitioner along with a red
polythene bag in his hand, search of which led to the
recovery of 05 packets of chars, each having different
weight, total of which came to 5347 grams. The

SHO/Seizing Officer separated 05 grams from each packet
as samples for chemical analysis by the FSL, hence, this
case.

3. Arguments of learned counsel for the parties heard
and record perused.

4. As per prosecution version, the petitioner along
with narcotics was present in “Dak Ismaeel Khwar”
waiting for his customers, but neither any test purchase has
been conducted nor any instruments such as scale, papers,
stapler and narcotic in sachets, usually used by the drugs
sellers for selling narcotics in small quantity to the
customers, have been shown recovered from the petitioner
what to say of recovery of any amount of sale proceeds.
The place of occurrence as shown in the site plan is a
straight ravine (Algadda) leading from East to the West
and vise versa, and visibility of the police seems quite
possible from a long distance. Similarly, towards the North
and the South of the place of occurrence there are hills. It is
not the case of the prosecution that the petitioner on
noticing the police tried to escape. The petitioner having
more than 05 Kgs chars despite having opportunity to
makes his escape good in the nearby hills or at least throw
away the narcotics, would still dare to proceeds towards the
police offer his arrest, is a crucial aspect of the case which
pinches a prudent mind about the authenticity of the
prosecution story, which is yet to be proved during trial,

however, at the moment it makes the case of the petitioner
arguable for the purpose of bail. Besides, the alleged
recovered contraband narcotics, as required under the
mandatory provision of section 33 KP CNS Act, 2019,
have not been produced before the learned Special
Court/Illaqa Judicial Magistrate at the time of production
of the petitioner for physical remand. FSL report qua the
samples is not available on file, therefore, it is still
uncertain as to whether the recovered material was
narcotics or something else which further makes the case
of the petitioner arguable for the purpose of bail.
Investigation is complete and petitioner is no more
required for further interrogation. Record is also silent
about previous involvement of the petitioner in such like
offences.

5. For the reasons stated above, this petition is
accepted. Accused/petitioner is allowed bail. He shall be
released on bail provided he furnishes bail bonds in the
sum of rupees two lacs with two local, reliable and
resourceful sureties each in the like amount to the
satisfaction of learned Illaqa Judicial Magistrate/MOD
concerned.

Announced:
25.01.2021

M.Siraj Afridi PS

SENIOR PUISNE JUDGE

SB of Mr. Justice Rooh ul Amin Khan Hon’ble Senior Puisne Judge
