IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
PESHAWAR

Judicial Department].

Cr.Misc.B.A. No.2025-P/2017.

Muhammad Ali Shan Akhtar alias Ali

Petitioner.
Versus
The State etc .
Respondents
For Petitioner :- Mr. Muhammad Sajid Khan Advocate.
State - Mati Ullah Baloch, Adv.

Respondent No.2:- = Mr. Aqal Muhammad, Advocate.

Date of hearing: 27.09.2017.

ORDER

ROOH-UL-AMIN KHAN, _J:- Muhammad Ali Shan
Akhtar alias Ali, seeks bail in case FIR # 287 dated
18.08.2017, registered under sections 324/34 PPC, in
Police Station Yar Hussain, District Swabi.

2. As per contents of First Information Report (FIR),
allegations against the petitioner are that on 18.08.2017 at
11.10 hours, he along with co-accused Faizan, Ali and
Kifayat Ullah, intercepted the complainant at Yar Hussain
road, ordered him to sign a ‘Talaq Nama’ and on his
refusal, thrashed him with fits and kicks, followed by firing
of the petitioner with which the complainant got hit and
sustained injury on his left arm. Elopement of Mst. Nayab

the fiancé of complainant, with the brother of accused,
namely, Zeeshan, has been advanced as motive behind the
incident, hence, this case.

3. Having heard the arguments of learned counsel for
the parties, it appears from the record that no doubt the role
of effective fire shot on the person of the injured
complainant, has been specifically assigned to the
petitioner coupled with the fact that the incident is of a
broad day-light and reported with promptitude at 10.30
hours, but the non-recovery of blood, any crime empty
from the spot, the medical examination of the injured
complainant at 10.30 hours i.e. 10 minutes prior to the
registration of the FIR, and blackening/charring marks
observed by the medical Officer on his wound as well as
keeping in mind the motive advanced by complainant, are
the disturbing circumstances giving rise to a doubt in a
prudent mind about the mode and manner of the
occurrence as alleged by the complainant. Even otherwise,
as per contents of FIR, the petitioner has not been shown to
have repeated the act of firing despite the fact that by then
the complainant was at his sole mercy, hence, applicability
of section 324 PPC and intention to kill, is debatable
question which makes the case of the petitioner arguable
for the purpose of bail. Keeping in view the nature of
injury on the person of complainant, at the most section
337-F (iii) PPC is to be attracted to the case of petitioner,

punishment of which is Daman and the court may also
award the punishment of imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extent to three years as
Ta’zir, whereas under sub-section 2 of section 337-N PPC,
the Court may having regard to the kind of hurt caused, in
addition to payment of Daman, award punishment of
imprisonment as tazir to the offender who is a previous
convict, habitual or hardened, desperate or dangerous
criminal or the offence has been committed in the name or
on the pretext of the honour. Thus, the primary punishment
of the offence under section 337-F (iii) PPC is Daman
whereas the punishment of imprisonment as Ta’zir is
subject to the conditions/grounds enunciated under section
337-N (2) PPC, which are yet to be determined during trial
after recording evidence.

4. For the reasons discussed above, this petition is
allowed. Accused/petitioner is admitted to bail provided he
furnishes bail bonds in the sum of rupees two lac with two
local, reliable and resourceful sureties each in the like
amount to the satisfaction of learned Illaqa Judicial
Magistrate/MOD, concerned.

Announced:
27.09.2017

Siraj Afridi P.S.

JUDGE

Mr. Justice Rooh-ul-Amin Khan.
