JUDGMENT SHEET

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
PESHAWAR
(Judicial Department)

Crl. Appeal No.584-P/2014
with Murder Reference NO.16-P/2014

Date of hearing:

Appellant (s) :

Respondent (s) :

JUDGMENT

ASSADULLAH KHAN CHAMMKANT, J.- At a trial

held by learned Additional Sessions Judge-IV, Mardan,
appellant Mustaqeem, having been found guilty of
committing the ‘Qatl-i-Amd” of Jawad Hussain deceased
and attempting at the lives of PWs Nawab Khan and Shah
Faisal, vide judgment dated 25.10.2014, was convicted
under section 302 (b) PPC and sentenced to normal penalty
of death as well as to pay Rs.1,00,000/-, as compensation
to LRs of the deceased in terms of S.544-A Cr.P.C. or in
default thereof, to undergo 06 months S.I. further. The
appellant has been further convicted under section 324
PPC and sentenced to undergo 07 years R.I. on two counts
alongwith fine of Rs.50,000/- or in default thereof to
undergo 06 months S.I. further. Benefit of $.382-B Cr.P.C.

has been extended to him.

2. Through the instant appeal, the appellant has
questioned his conviction and sentences, while the learned
Trial Court has sent Murder Reference No.16-P/2014 in
terms of S.374 Cr.P.C. for confirmation of death sentence
of the convict.

3. Since both the matters are the outcome of one
and the same judgment of the learned Trial Court dated
25.10.2014, therefore, this common judgment shall govern
the same.

4. Brief account of the prosecution case is that
on 25.10.2003 at 08.50 hours, complainant Nawab Khan
(PW.6), in company of dead body of his son Jawad
Hussain, reported to local police in casualty of DHQ
hospital Mardan that on the fateful day he alongwith his
deceased son Jawad Hussain and grandson Shah Faisal,
was on the way to Bazaar and when reached Akbar road in
front of the shop of “Nanbai”, Mustaqeem (appellant-
convict herein) alongwith Arshad and Amanat Khan
(acquitted co-accused), duly armed with Kalashnikovs,
caught hold of him and started thrashing him with Butts of
their weapons; that his deceased son and grandson tried to
separate/ rescue him, but in the meantime, accused opened

fire at them with the intention to commit their murder and

as a result of firing of appellant Mustaqgeem, his son
Hussain deceased, got hit and died; that because of the
Butt blows inflicted on their persons by the accused, he
and his grandson are feeling pain in different parts of their
bodies. In addition to complainant, the incident is stated to
have been witnessed by PWs Shah Faisal and Haji Ihsan
ud Din. An altercation between the parties on preceding
evening over a money dispute has been alleged as motive
behind the incident. Report of the complainant was
reduced in to writing in the shape of murasila, on the basis
of which, FIR No.1256 dated 25.10.2003, was registered
under sections 302/324/34 PPC, in Police Station Hoti,
Mardan against the accused.

5. Dr. Khalid Hussain (PW.1) conducted autopsy
on the dead body of the deceased on 25.10.2003 at about
09.30 a.m. and found the following injuries on his person:-
1. Firearm entry wound on left side of back near

the spinal cord, size 2 x 1/2 inches.
2. Firearm exit wound on the left scapula
corresponding to wound No.1, size % x 1/2”.

3. Firearm entry wound on the left side of back

below the scapula size 2x % inch.

4. Firearm exit wound on the left arm near left
shoulder joint, size 1 x 1 inch.

5. Firearm entry wound on the right side of back
on right scapula, size 2 x % inch.

6. Firearm exit wound corresponding to wound
No.5 on interior aspect or right axilla, size 2 x 3
inch.

7. Firearm entry wound on the lateral aspect of the
left thigh, size % x % inch.

8. Firearm exit wound corresponding to wound
No.7 anterior medical aspect of the left thigh
size 3 x 3 inches.

Opinion: According to his opinion the cause of death was

injury to vital organs like heart, lung, major vessels due to

firearm injures.

Probable time between injuries and death has been given

as ¥2 hours while between death and postmortem as about

one hour.
On the same day, he also examined injured

Nawab Khan at 10.20 a.m. and found small abrasion on his

chin and face. Similarly, on examination of injured Shah

Faisal, the medical officer observed a small lacerated

wound on his forehead and another small lacerated wound
below his right eye.

6. Said Ghalib Khan SI (PW.8) conducted
investigation in the case. He proceeded to the spot and
prepared site plan Exh.PB, at the instance of eyewitnesses.
During spot inspection, he secured blood from the place of
the deceased vide recovery memo Exh.PW.8/1 and 10
spent bullets of 7.62 bore vide recovery memo
Exh.PW.8/3. Vide recovery memo Exh.PW.8/2, he took
into possession the last worn bloodstained garments of the
deceased, recorded statements of the PWs, sent the
bloodstained articles to the FSL, report whereof is Exh.PX.
He also sent the empties to the FSL, report whereof, is
Exh.PZ. The case property/ above articles being allegedly
damaged in flood could not be exhibited. Liaqat Ali Khan
SI (PW.4), initiated proceedings under sections 204 and 87
Cr.P.C. against the accused. He placed on file the
postmortem and medico legal reports of the deceased and
injured and after completion of investigation handed over
the case file to the SHO for submission of challan.

7. Initially, co-accused Amanat Khan and
Arshad Khan were arrested, tried and ultimately, acquitted

vide judgment dated 15.12.2009.

8. Later on, accused-appellant was arrested.
Gohar Ali Khan SI (PW.5), obtained his physical remand
from the court of learned Illaqa Judicial Magistrate. During
interrogation, the accused pointed out the crime spot and at
his instance pointation memo Exh.PW.5/2 was prepared.
After completion of investigation, supplementary challan
was submitted against the appellant.

9. On receipt of challan by the learned Trial Court,
appellant was summoned and formally charge sheeted, to
which he pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. To prove its
case, prosecution examined eight witnesses. After closure
of the prosecution evidence, statement of the appellant was
recorded under section 342 Cr.P.C., wherein he denied the
prosecution allegations and professed his innocence. He,
however, neither wished to be examined on oath under
section 340 (2) Cr.P.C. nor opted to produce evidence in
defence. On conclusion of trial, the learned Trial Court,
after hearing both the sides, convicted and sentenced the
appellant as mentioned above, hence, this appeal.

10. Learned counsel for the appellant argued that
impugned judgment of the learned Trial Court is against
the law, facts and evidence available on record; that

injured PW Shah Faisal has been abandoned by the

prosecution for no good reason; that PW Nawab Khan is
untrustworthy and not a credible witness while PW Ihsan
ud Din failed to establish his presence on the spot through
some strong physical circumstance; that their testimony is
suffering from material contradictions and discrepancies
creating serious doubts in the prosecution case; that their
escape from the firing of three accused being in their close
proximity or being let off by the accused does not appeal
to a prudent mind; that keeping in view position of PW
Nawab, as shown in the site plan, he should have been the
first target of the firing, but astonishingly he has not
sustained any firearm injury; that the unnatural conduct of
PW Ihsan ud Din is another disturbing factor about his
absence on the spot; that site plan and medical evidence
contradict the ocular account; that on the same set of
evidence co-accused have already been acquitted and
appeal against their acquittal has also been dismissed up to
this Court; that mere positive FSL report qua the crime
empties and alleged abscondence of the appellant which he
has denied, in absence of direct evidence of unimpeachable
character and recovery of crime weapon, would not be
sufficient for recording conviction in a capital charge; that

prosecution evidence being pregnant with doubts, benefit

of the same is to be extended to the appellant and he be
acquitted of the charge.

11. Conversely, learned AAG assisted by learned
counsel for the complainant argued that appellant is
directly charged for effective firing at the deceased; that
ocular account furnished by the PWs is straightforward and
confidence inspiring which is corroborated by medical
evidence, site plan, recoveries of blood and empties from
the spot coupled with unexplained noticeable abscondence
of the appellant; that it is the quality of evidence and not its
quantity which is taken into consideration and conviction
can be recorded even on the basis of testimony of single
witness; that the role of the appellant is squarely different
from that of the acquitted co-accused, therefore, acquittal
of co-accused would have no bearing on the case of the
prosecution as by now the principle of sifting grain from
the chaff is vigorously followed by the Courts in the
country, on account of which the prosecution has
successfully proved the guilt of the appellant through
overwhelming evidence available on record. They while

supporting the impugned judgment sought dismissal of the

appeal.

12. We have’ considered the respective
submissions of learned counsel for the parties, learned
AAG for the State and perused the record with their able
assistance.

13. Ocular account of the incident has been
furnished by complainant Nawab Khan (PW.6) and Haji
Ihsan ud Din (PW.7). Former is father of the deceased and
latter is his brother-in-law. No doubt, conviction can be
recorded on the testimony of eyewitnesses having close
relations with the deceased as well as on the testimony of
solitary eyewitness, provided the same is trustworthy,
confidence inspiring and corroborated by — strong
circumstances. In this case, complainant Nawab Khan,
while appearing as PW.6, reiterated the same version as set
forth by him in his initial report. He again assigned the
role of firing to all the three accused on them, however, he
specifically attributed the role of effective shots at the
deceased to appellant Mustaqeem. A look over the site
plan Exh.PB, reveals that complainant has been shown at
point No.1, abandoned PW Shah Faisal at point No.2 and
the deceased at point No.3. The places of PW Nawab Khan
and abandon PW Shah Faisal, fell in front of the accused

shown at points No.5, 6 and 7, whereas the deceased has

10

been shown on back side of the above named PWs at point
No.3. In such eventualities, in case of firing by the three
accused, the PWs should have been hit being closer to the
accused in their front, as compared to deceased who is
behind the PWs. PW Nawab Khan deposed that they were
fired at from a distance of 4 paces by the accused, but none
of the PWs has sustained any firearm injury. Moreso, if
complainant Nawab Khan (PW.6), was being beaten by the
accused and his son Jawad Hussain deceased and grandson
Shah Faisal (abandoned PW), tried to rescue him, he
should have been the first target of the accused being
already in their clutches, but astonishingly he did not
receive any injury and his son behind him at a distance of
14 paces from the accused got hit. It is not the case of the
complainant that he and PW Shah Faisal took shelter
during firing, hence, their escape or being let off by the
accused being armed with automatic weapons ejecting
number of shots in seconds, in presence of common
motive, is quite disturbing fact which create serious doubts
about the mode and manner of the incident as alleged by
the complainant. Only ten empties of 7.62 bore have allegedly
been shown recovered from the spot. In case of firing with

three Kalashnikovs, ejecting number of empties in seconds,

11

much damage should have been caused to the deceased as
well as the alleged eyewitnesses and much empties should
have been recovered, but such is not the case herein. In his
initial report complainant has not uttered a single word as
to how and by which means the deceased was shifted to
the hospital. In his court statement he deposed that the
deceased was shifted in a car, but his statement in this
regard has been contradicted by PW Ihsan ud Din as
according to him the deceased was shifted in a Suzuki
Van.

14. Haji Ihsan ud Din while appearing PW.7
deposed that on the fateful time on hue and cry, he came
out of his clinic and saw the accused thrashing the
complainant with butts of their Kalashnikovs; that
deceased Jawad Hussain and Shah Faisal (abandoned PW)
tried to separate them, but the accused opened fire at them,
and the deceased got hit with the firing of accused
Mustageem and died. This witness is the son-in-law of
complainant Nawab Khan. In the site plan his presence has
been shown at point No.4 near the shop of one Fayaz. He
poses himself to be a dispenser in the clinic of doctor
Jehangir, situated in Mohallah Sherdal Khan and originally

resides in Guli Bagh, lying at a distance of 4/5 Kilometer

12

from the crime venue, as such falls within the definition of
a chance witness. Chance witness, in legal parlance is a
witness who claimed his presence on the spot at the
eventful time, albeit his presence on the spot is a sheer
chance, as in the ordinary course of business, place of
residence and normal course of events, he was not
supposed to be present on the spot, but at a place where he
resided, carried on business or run day to day affairs.
Testimony of a chance witness, in such context, is
ordinarily not accepted unless justifiable reasons are
shown to establish his presence at the crime scene at the
relevant time as in normal course, the presumption under
the law that would operate would be that such witness was
absent from the crime spot. In rare cases, the testimony of
a chance witness can be relied upon, provided some
convincing explanation appealing to a prudent mind of his
presence on the crime venue are put forth, when the
occurrence took place, otherwise, his testimony would fall
within the category of suspect evidence and cannot be
accepted without a pinch of salt. Guidance in this regard
can be derived from the judgment of the august Apex
Court in case titled, “Mst. Sughra Begum and another

Vs Qaiser Pervez and others” (2015 SCMR 1142).

13

Deriving wisdom from the judgment (supra), we do not
find any clinic of doctor Jehangir in the surrounding of the
crime venue in the site plan Exh.PB. The place of
occurrence is Akbar road while clinic of doctor Jehangir
has been alleged to be situated in Mohallah Sherdal Khan.
Neither doctor Jehangir has been examined by the
Investigating Officer nor produced by PW Ihsan ud Din in
support of his version. In cross-examination PW Ihsan ud
Din deposed that complainant was being beaten by the
accused for about then minutes and then suddenly firing
started. According to him he did not try to separate/ rescue
the complainant from the accused. The unnatural conduct
of this PW like a silent spectator to see thrashing of his
father-in-law for ten minutes, is beyond our understanding.
Had he been present on the spot, he would have never
acted in the alleged manner rather would have rushed
towards his father-in-law to rescue him from the clutches
of the accused. Keeping in view the above facts and
circumstances, we are firm in our view that PW Haji Ihsan
ud Din, failed to establish his presence on the spot at the
time of incident and he being son-in-law of the

complainant is a procured witness.

14

15. An altercation over a money dispute between
the complainant party and the accused has been alleged as
motive behind the incident. PW Nawab Khan deposed that
he did not lodge any report regarding the altercation; that
he had not stated as to where the altercation took place;
that he had to pay Rs.165/- to the accused. On the one
hand, no evidence, much less tangible has been led to
prove the motive. i.e. altercation over Rs.165/-, while on
the other hand, we fail to understand that for such a
meager amount, one would opt to take the life of other,
curtailing his own liberty and tarnishing his future. As per
ratio of the judgment of the august Apex Court in case
titled, “Pathan Vs the State” (2015 SCMR 315), motive in
legal parlance is ordinarily not considered as a principal or
primary evidence in a murder case, however, in rare cases,
motive did play a very vital and decisive role for
committing murder. The relevant Paragraphs of the
judgment are reproduced below:-

“ Para 6. The only cause/ motive for causing

the murder of the deceased was that

appellant was a teacher in the school where

the deceased was a head teacher and the

appellant was transferred to a_ village

15

mosque school, on which he was annoyed
and was driven to the extreme to take
revenge. In the first instance, the motive has
not been establish in any manner
whatsoever through any documentary
evidence or even secondary evidence of
reliable nature, but we fail to understand
and to rely on such artificial motive because
under the law a head teacher has no
authority to transfer a teacher of his school
to another not under his control and
management but he can only recommend
his transfer to the Education Officer of the

District or of the Circle for that end.

Para 8. True that, motive in legal parlance
is ordinarily not considered as a principal
or primary evidence in a murder case,
however, in some rare cases like the present
one, the motive would play a very vital and
decisive role for committing a murder. As
the motive has almost disappeared for want

of proof and being entirely feeble, artificial

16

and not at all appealing to a prudent mind,

therefore, it has rendered the entire episode

of the tragedy doubtful. On this score too,

the prosecution case is liable to be discarded

as a whole”.
16. Another disturbing aspect of the case is that
the deceased and accused have been shown in one and the
same level at the crime spot, but according to Dr. Khalid
Hussain (PW.1), who conducted autopsy on the dead body
of the deceased, entry wound No.1 on the person of the
deceased was at higher level than its exit wound No.2 and
same was the position of entry wound No.7 and exit
wound No.8, meaning thereby that that at the time of firing
the assailant was on higher position and the deceased on
down level, thus, medical evidence negates the ocular
account.
17. As regard positive FSL report qua ten empties
of 7.62 bore, allegedly recovered from the spot, suffice it
to say that on the one hand, these have not been exhibited
during trial, while on the other hand, no crime weapon has
been recovered from the appellant. These empties have not
been specifically attributed to the appellant. Though,

appellant has been attributed effective firing at the

17

deceased, but at the same time, the other two acquitted co-
accused have also been assigned the role of ineffective
firing. In absence of recovery of the crime weapon from
the appellant and comparison of the crime empties with the
same by the FSL, by no stretch of imagination these
empties could be only be attributed to the appellant.
Moreover, the empties have been sent to the FSL with a
delay of about 11 days. Where these empties remained for
a long period of 11 days and whether these were in safe
hands till its dispatch to the FSL, are the disturbing
question which have not been answered by the
prosecution, hence, positive FSL report, in the
circumstances, would lose its authenticity. Over and above,
such like recoveries are always considered as corroborative
pieces of evidence, which cannot be a substitute of direct
evidence. Corroborative pieces of evidence are always
taken into consideration alongwith direct evidence.
Similarly, positive Serologist Report qua bloodstained
articles as well as autopsy report of the deceased, can only
to prove the unnatural death of the deceased with firearm
on a particular place, but by whom, it never tell the
name/names of the culprit/culprits. Since, we have

disbelieved the direct evidence; therefore, these

18

corroborative pieces of evidence by no mean would
sufficient to bring home the guilt of the appellant.
Guidance may be derived from Riaz Ahmed’s case (2010
SCMR 846). It has been held by the Hon’ble Supreme
Court that in Ijaz Ahmed’s case (1997 SCMR 1279 and
Asadullah’s case (PLD 1971 SC 541), that corroborative
evidence is meant to test the veracity of ocular evidence.
Both corroborative and ocular evidence is to be read
together and not in isolation. As per ratio of judgment of
the Hon’ble Supreme Court in case titled, “Saifullah Vs
the State” (1985 SCMR 410), when there is no
eyewitness to be relied upon, then there is nothing, which
can be corroborated by the recovery. In case titled, “Riaz
Masih Vs the State” 1995 SCMR 1730, it has been
observed by the august Apex Court that recovery of crime
weapon by itself is not sufficient for conviction on murder
charge. In case of Siraj Ws Crown (PLD 1956 Federal
Court 123), it has been held that recovery of handle of
blood-stained hatchet at the instance of the accused, when
other evidence was disbelieved, then it was not enough for
conviction.

18. So far as absconsion of the appellant is

concerned, on the one hand, he has denied the same,

19

while on the other hand, it is settled law that abscondence
alone, cannot be a substitute of real evidence. It has been
observed by the apex Court in Farman Ali and others’
case (PLD 1980 SC 201), that abscondence by itself
would be of no avail to prosecution in absence of any other
evidence against the absconding accused and mere
abscondence of accused would not be enough to sustain
his/her conviction. Reliance can also be placed on case
titled, “Muhammad Vs Pesham Khan (1986 SCMR
823).

19. For what has been discussed above, we have
reached to an irresistible conclusion that prosecution has
miserably failed to prove the guilt of the appellant through
cogent and confidence inspiring evidence beyond shadow
of reasonable doubt. The learned Trial Court failed to
appreciate the available evidence in its true perspective
and thus reached to erroneous conclusion by holding the
appellant guilty of the offence. The prosecution evidence
is pregnant with doubts, benefit of which is to be
extended to the appellant not as a matter or grace or
concession but as matter of right, as per golden principle
of benefit of doubt, according to which, one substantial

doubt would be enough for acquittal of the accused. The

20

rule of benefit of doubt is essentially a rule of prudence,
which cannot be ignored while dispensing justice in
accordance with law. Conviction must be based on
unimpeachable evidence and certainty of guilt and any
doubt arising in the prosecution case, must be resolved in
favour of the accused. The said rule is based on the
maxim “ it is better that ten guilty persons be acquitted
rather than one innocent person be convicted” which
occupied a pivotal place in the Islamic Law and is
enforced strictly in view of the saying of the Holy Prophet
(PBUH) that the “mistake of Qazi (Judge) in releasing a
criminal is better than his mistake in punishing an
innocent”. Wisdom in this regard may be derived from the
judgments of the august Apex court in case titled,
”’Muhammad Khan and another Vs the State” (1999
SCMR 1220) and case titled, “Muhammad Ikram Vs
the State” (2009 SCMR 230).

20. In view of the above, we allow this appeal, set
aside the conviction and sentences of the appellant
recorded by the learned Trial Court vide impugned
judgment dated 25.10.2014 and hereby acquit him of the

charge levelled against him. Accordingly, Murder

21

Reference No.16-P/2014, sent by the learned Trial Court,
is not confirmed and is answered in the Negative.

21. These are reasons of our short order of even
date, which read as under:-

“For reasons to be recorded later on, this
appeal is allowed. The conviction and
sentence of appellant, namely, Mustaqeem,
awarded to him in case FIR No.1256 dated
25.10.2003 under sections 302/324/34 PPC,
Police Station Hoti Mardan by learned
Additional Sessions Judge-IV, Mardan, vide
impugned judgment dated 25.10.2014, are
set aside and he is acquitted of all the
charges levelled against him. He be released
from jail forthwith, if not required in any
other case. The murder Reference sent by
the trial Judge is not confirmed and
answered in the negative”.

22. The Additional Registrar (Judicial) of this
Court is directed to send copy of this judgment to the
learned Trial Judge, Miss Ambrareen Navid the then
learned Additional Sessions Judge-IV, Mardan.

Announced
06.10.2015

JUDGE

JUDGE

*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

22
*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

23
*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

24
