JUDGMENT SHEET

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
PESHAWAR
(Judicial Department)

Cr.Misc. BA No.1988-P/2015

Date of hearing:
Petitioner (s) :

Respondent (s) :

JUDGMENT
ASSADULLAH _KHAN _CHAMMKANT. J.-

Petitioners Nihar Ali and Jabbar, seek bail in case FIR
No.164 dated 30.09.2015, registered under sections 302/34
PPC, in Police Station Parmoli, District Swabi, wherein
they are charged for committing the murder of Gul Hayat
deceased with firearm on a motive of previous blood feud.
2. Complainant Muhammad Hayat stated at the
bar that he being poor is unable to bear the expenses of
private counsel, therefore, would rely on the arguments of
learned State counsel.

3. Arguments of learned counsel for the
petitioner and learned State counsel heard. Record perused.
4. The incident has taken place on 30.09.2015
at 05.00 hours, in a vacant plot near the house of
complainant, situated at a distance of 8/9 Kilometers from
Police Station Parmoli Swabi, but it has been reported with

abnormal delay of 8 hours at 13.30 hours, for which no

explanation, much less plausible, has been furnished by the
complainant, therefore, possible of consultation and
deliberation on the part of the complainant to charge the
accused, cannot be ruled out. No source of light has been
disclosed by the complainant in his report while the time of
incident is 05.00 hours and by such time in the month of
September dark still prevails. Besides, a general role of
firing has been attributed to both the petitioners while as
per FSL report the recovered empties have been fired from
one and the same weapon and as per autopsy report,
dimensions of injuries on the person of the deceased are
one and the same, therefore, it is yet to be determined as to
whether the incident is the doing of single person or
otherwise. On tentative assessment of the material
available on file and discussed above, the case of the
petitioners requires further probe into their guilt of the
petitioners, therefore, I am inclined to exercise the
discretion of bail in their favour.

5. Accordingly, this petition is allowed.
Accused/petitioners are admitted to bail provided each one
of them furnishes bail bonds to the tune of Rs.3,00,000/-
with two sureties each in the like amount to the satisfaction

of learned Illaqa Judicial Magistrate/MOD concerned.

Announced
11.11.2015.
JUDGE

*M Siraj Afridi PS. D
*M Siraj Afridi PS. D
*M Siraj Afridi PS. D
7. For what has been discussed above, Suo motu
notice given to accused Shakir stands withdrawn. He is
admitted to bail on already existing bail bonds, on merits.
Since this court has already directed expeditious
conclusion of trial while dealing with the bail petition of
co-accused Farman, therefore, office is directed to send the
record to the quarter concerned within two days, positively.
announced:

19.10.2015

JUDGE

*M Siraj Afridi PS. D
*M Siraj Afridi PS. D
