JUDGMENT SHEET
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
BANNU BENCH.

(Judicial Department)
Cr. Misc: B.A No. 373-/2023.

Arif Ali
Vs
The State and another.

JUDGMENT

Date of hearing 07.9.2023

For petitioner:- | Mr. Muhammad Ashraf Khan Marwat,
Advocate. ;

For State:- Mr. Hafiz Muhammad Hanif, AAG.

For respondents:- Mr. Muhammad Fakht-e-Alam Jaghra,
Advocate through video link.

2 2K 3 eK

FAZAL SUBHAN, J.- Instant is post arrest bail application
of petitioner Arif Ali son of Zard Ali, charged and arrested in
case FIR No.251 dated 20.7.2022 registered under sections
302/324/34 PPC of Police Station Pezu, District Lakki
Marwat.

2. Contents of FIR reveals that Ameen Jan son of
Sher Muhammad, on 20.7.2022, while present with the dead
body of his son Irfan Ullah aged about 24/25 years and
injured Asad Hameed, grandson of the complainant aged

about 14/15 years, reported the matter to the local police at
the spot of occurrence that on the relevant day he along with
his son and grandson, named above, were proceeding
towards their house situated at Warghar Pezu and at about
07:55 a.m. when they reached near Iqra Public School,
accused Akhtar Ali and Arif Ali sons of Zard Ali, resident of
Wanda Kali District D.I.Khan, came on motorcycle from
opposite side and blocked their path, drew their pistols and
both the accused started firing upon them with the intention
to cause death and as a result of their firing his son Irfan
Ullah and grandson Asad Hameed were hit and. they fell
from the motorcycle, however, he escaped unhurt, whereas
in the meanwhile the accused decamped from the spot. He
attended his injured son but found him dead. He, therefore,
charged the accused named above for the murder of his son
and causing injury to Asad Hameed and ineffective firing
upon him. Motive for the occurrence was stated that his son
Irfan Ullah had abducted the wife of Arif Ali.

3. With this background of the case arguments of
learned counsel for the parties and that of learned AAG for
the State heard and record perused.

4. Learned counsel for petitioner in his arguments
submitted that criminal cases are always based on direct as

well as circumstantial evidence and when direct evidence is
available then normally the circumstantial evidence is not
taken into consideration or not given much weightage. He
contended that trial of the petitioner has already commenced
and vide order sheet No.14 dated 21.6.2023, the prosecution
has abandoned injured PW Asad Hameed. That said Asad
Hameed was a star witness of the prosecution and by
abandoning him prosecution has given up the most important
witness available to them in the trial, hence in the absence of
such evidence there is no likelihood of conviction of the
petitioner, especially when no plausible reason for
abandoning the said witness has been advanced. He
contended that after the alleged occurrence the complainant
has not made any efforts to shift the dead body as well as
injured to the hospital and the report was made at the spot of
occurrence, wherefrom it can be inferred that the
complainant was not at all present at the relevant time of
occurrence otherwise he may have made efforts to shift the
deceased and injured to the police station or hospital. It was
further submitted that despite submission of challan in the
case on 04.01.2023 the prosecution has failed to examine
any witness in the case. It was further argued that 4 empties
were recovered from point ‘C’ of the site plan and were

subsequently sent to the FSL authorities and vide opinion of
the expert the 4 empties were fired from one and the same
weapon. In respect of the time of occurrence the learned
counsel for petitioner submitted that the medical evidence
does not support the time of occurrence mentioned in the
FIR and in the post mortem report the medical officer opined
that the time between death and post mortem was about 2
hours and 30 minutes which does not coincide with the time
of occurrence reported in the FIR. He, therefore, submitted
that all these facts are sufficient to make the case of the
petitioner one of further inquiry into his guilt and, therefore,
he is entitled for grant of bail in the case.

5. Conversely, learned counsel for complainant
submitted that the occurrence has taken place at 07:55 hours
and report was lodged on the spot at 08:15 hours, hence it is
a promptly lodged FIR which dislodge any presumption of
deliberation and consultation on the part of complainant.
Contented further that at bail stage tentative assessment of
the record is to be made and deeper appreciation is to be
avoided lest it may prejudice the case of either party.
According to him the petitioner is directly charged in the FIR
and the motive for the occurrence shows that he had
sufficient reason to commit the offence. He further submitted

that the deceased has received 3 fire arm injures while the
injured was hit with a single fire arm injury, hence it
supports the prosecution case, because 4 empties were
recovered from the spot. That as per FIR, age of the injured
Asad Hameed is 13/14 years and due to tender age he was
abandoned by the prosecution, however, it does not give any
premium to the petitioner because the complainant of the
case is yet to depose against the petitioner. He, therefore,
submitted that in light of the available material on record the
petitioner is not entitled for the grant of bail.

6. After hearing the above arguments and tentative
assessment of record it is evident that the petitioner is
directly charged in a promptly lodged FIR for the murder of
deceased Irfan Ullah and causing injury to one Asad
Hameed, grandson of the complainant. The prosecution story
is supported by recovery of blood from the spot of deceased
and 4 empties of 30 bore and recovery of blood stained
garments of the deceased and injured. The medical evidence
also lends support to the prosecution version. After the
occurrence the petitioner remained fugitive from law for
about 3 months which provide another circumstance
connecting him with the crime.

7. So far as the question of abandoning PW Asad

Hameed is concerned, in my view, it does not provide a
sufficient reason or legal justification, for grant of bail
especially when sufficient material already discussed above
is available against the petitioner and at the same time
complainant of the case is yet to record his statement against
the petitioner. It is well settled that it is the quality and not
the quantity of evidence, to determine the fate of an accused
and conviction can be based on the evidence of solitary
witness if the same rang true and appeal to prudent mind, but
mere abandonment of a witness during trial does not provide
any ground for grant of bail. At the most if the petitioner
consider it a plausible reason then he can move an
application under section 265-K Cr.P.C which of course
would be considered and decided by the learned trial Court
on its own merits.

8. For the time being the petitioner is prima facie
connected with an offence which falls within the prohibitory
clause of section 497 Cr.P.C and, therefore, he is not found
entitled for grant of bail. Resultantly, this petition is
dismissed.

9. Before parting this order, it is to be mentioned
that the observations recorded for deciding this bail
application shall be considered as tentative in nature and

shall not influence the mind of the trial Court who shall
apply its independent mind and make deeper assessment of
the evidence brought before it during trial. In support of the
abvoe reliance can safely be placed on the judgment of case

titled “Shoaib Mehmood _Butt-Vs-Iftikhar-ul-Hag and_ 3
others” reported in (1996 SCMR 1845), wherein it has been

held that:-

“That trial Court has to analyse the legal worth
of material to be produced by the parties
including affidavits and during hearing of bail
application, the Court can make tentative
assessment of material which is different from
and not at equal footing with the appraisement
of evidence, which is within the ambit of
jurisdiction of the trial Court.”

Announced.
07.9.2023.

Thsan.*/- rc 2 P a=
. JUDGE.

(S.B}
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Fazal Subhan.

