Nawab

JUDGMENT SHEET

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
MINGORA BENCH (DAR-UL-QAZA), SWAT
(Judicial Department)

Cr.M.B.C.A. No. 92-M of 2016.
JUDGMENT
Date of hearing: 18.01.2017.

Petitioner: - (Amir Baz Khan) by Syed Abdul
Hag, Advocate.
Respondents: - (the State & 1 another) by

Barrister Asad Hameed-ur-Rahman, State
counsel and Mr. Asad Ullah, Advocate.

MOHAMMAD IBRAHIM KHAN, J.- By the order

dated 02.8.2016 accused/respondent Rashid
Ahmad, on his acceptance of B.A. No. 176/4 of
2016 was granted bail by the learned Additional
Sessions Judge/Izafi Zila Qazi Dir Lower Camp

Court at Timergara.

2. Dissatisfied, complainant Amir Baz
Khan has preferred cancellation petition within the
meaning of section 497 (5) Cr. P.C for recalling of
the order of learned Additional Sessions Judge/Izafi

Zila Qazi Timergara.

3. Amir Baz Khan the complainant
preferred the complaint to the Station House
Officer of P.S. Talash District Dir Lower stating

therein that he has purchased certain piece of land
Nawab

through unregistered sale deed No. 882 dated
02.10.2014 for an amount of Rs. 51,000,00/- Later
on another transaction vide another unregistered
sale deed No. 883 of even date was also executed
for an amount of Rs. 66,000,00/- for some other
land as sale consideration in favour of the
complainant. The accused/respondent Rashid
Ahmad posed himself to be lawful owner of the suit
property. By the moment the possession was to be
obtained, another person by the name of Fazal
Rahman alias Fateh Gul resident of Timergara
District Dir used to come forward and interfere in
his possession. The allegations against the
accused/respondent are that each time in every sale
he obtained the amount from petitioner in lieu of

purchase of lands through fraud.

4. Having heard learned counsel for the
petitioner and learned counsel for the
accused/respondent/learned State counsel, record

gone through with their valuable assistance.

5. Learned counsel for the petitioner
mainly relied upon 2007 YLR 249 (Lahore)
“Waseem Zia vs the State and another”, 2012 Pr.

L. J 1350 (Lahore) “ M. Iqbal Butt vs the State
Nawab

and 3 others” and 2005 MLD 432 (Lahore) “
Messer Pakistan State Oil Company Ltd through
Divisional Manager, Retail PSO vs Shaukat
Magpbool and another”. In view of the wisdom
contained in these judgments, it has emphasized
upon that when the prosecution possessed sufficient
material to prima facie connect accused with the
commission of alleged offence and an offence fell
under the prohibitory clause of section 497 Cr.P.C
concession of bail granted to an accused can be
recalled. Inversely learned counsel for the
accused/respondent placed reliance on 2008 P Cr.
L J 1565 (Lahore) “Aurangzeb vs Shakeel Ahmad
and another”, 2006 P Cr. L J 252 (Peshawar)
“Haji Khan Sherin and another vs Siraj and
another”, 2004 P Cr. L. J 1447 (Karachi)
“Muhammad Boota vs Abdul Hamid and 3
others”, 2010 SCMR 580 “The State/Anti-
Narcotic through Director-General vs Rafiq
Ahmad Channa”, 2004 SCMR 231 “ Muzaffar
Iqbal vs Muhammad Imran Aziz and others”,
1991 SCMR 322 “ the State vs Malik Mukhtar
Ahmad Awan”, 2009 SCMR 299 “ Mitho Pitafi vs
the State” and 2008 YLR 1070 (Peshawar) “ Shah

Diyaz Khan vs the State”. In the light of these
Nawab

authorities since the principles for the grant of bail
and those for cancellation of bail are quite different
therefore, it was prayed for dismissal of the

petition.

6. After the complaint was registered, the
police officials of P.S. Talash thought it best that
sections 419/420/468/471/34 PPC are applicable in
the given circumstances of the complaint/petition.
Out of these, section 420 PPC is bailable whereas
sections 468 & 471 PPC being non-cognizable
offences, police cannot arrest an accused without
express warrant from the Court of Magistrate of the
lst Class. There is only one section i.e. 419 PPC
whereby the punishment has been provided up to 7
years with fine or both. If at all the involvement of
the accused/respondent for the purpose of bail
cancellation is looked into it can only be construed

under section 419 PPC only.

7. It is a fact that the principles for the
grant of bail and those for cancellation of bail are
quite different. On the basis of evidence so
collected, the prosecution shall find exceptional
grounds whenever a competent Court having

jurisdiction in the matter has granted bail which
order shall be declared patently illegal, erroneous
and being factually incorrect which might have
resulted into miscarriage of justice. The relevant

portion of section 497 (5) is reproduced below:-

(5) A High Court or Court of Session
and, in the case of a person released by
itself, any other Court may cause any
person who has been released under this
section to be arrested and may commit
him to custody.

8. There requires strong reasons for
cancellation of an order which shall also be held
perverse and disregard to well settled principles
regulating the grant of bail or for reason that the
material/evidence was available on the file which
cannot rightly connect the accused with the
commission of the crime punishment of which falls
within the prohibitory clause of section 497 Cr.P.C,
provided further that there shall be no reason to fall

the role of the petitioner within the scope of further
inquiry.

9. The matter seems to be of civil nature and
it is yet to know whether the sale deeds have been

executed by the accused/respondent and for reasons that

Nawab
Nawab

it requires evidence to be recorded to hold that the sale
deeds to be either false/bogus or the accused/respondent

has acted in the capacity of cheating by personation.

10. Regard to  abscondence of the
accused/respondent being fugitive from justice
proceedings under section 512 Cr.P. although were
initiated but up till now he has not been declared
proclaimed offender. Even otherwise bail could be
granted if accused had good case for bail on merits and
mere fugitive from justice for quite some time would not
come in the way of granting him bail. In this case the
impugned order of the learned Additional Sessions
Judge/Izafi Zila Qazi Timergara is not open to any
exception as it is neither fanciful nor otherwise illegal in
the given set of circumstances of this case, thereby held
quite legally justified. There is no scope for cancellation
of the bail granted to the accused/respondent by the said
learned competent Court, hence this bail cancellation

petition being shorn of merits stands dismissed.

Announced

Dt: 18.01.2017 JUDGE
