



ORDER SHEET




                                                  

IN THE HIGH COURT OF SINDH AT KARACHI
 
                       
  Cr. Bail Application No. 07 of 2013
 



Date


Order with signature of Judge



 
1.For
orders on M.A.No.18/2013
2.For
Hearing.
 
21.02.2013
 
 
    
    Mr. S. Suleman Badshah, advocate for the applicants
Mr. Shujaat Ali Khan, advocate
for the complainant 
Mr. Abdullah Rajput, APG.
                                   
-----------
 
O R D E R
 
Aqeel
Ahmed Abbasi, J:  Being
aggrieved and dis-satisfied with the order dated 04.12.2012 passed by the
learned Vth Additional Sessions Judge, Karachi West in Bail Application No.1298
of 2012, Crime No. 225/2012 under section 324/34 PPC registered at P.S. Docks,
Karachi, whereby bail of the applicants was dismissed, the applicants have
filed instant bail application under section 497 Cr.P.C seeking their release
on bail subject to furnishing surety.
2.       Brief
facts as stated in the FIR are as under:
“At the
verbatim of the complainant statement u/s 154 Cr.P.C recorded in Civil Hospital
Karachi, which reads as under:
“I,
reside near Al-falah Chowk Mohammadi Colony Karachi. On 09.09.2012 I was
available at my home at 9.00 AM my grandsons namely Khalid and Osama were
beaten by Hussain son of Noor Muhammad and his companions on plucking of the
flower. My son Abdul Raheem went for complaint to Hussain and his companions as
to why they have beaten the Children. On this, Hussain annoyed and opened fire
upon my son, his companions were standing nearby. My son received injuries on
his chest, stomach and left leg. I rushed there and brought my son to Civil
Hospital who is in Operation Theater and is under treatment. My complaint is
against Hussain and his three identifiable companions for causing injury to my
son with intention to kill him with weapon. Action be taken against them.” 
 
3.       Learned
counsel for the applicants states that the applicants are innocent and have
been falsely implicated in the instant crime, whereas they have not been
nominated in the FIR. Per learned counsel, this is a case of counter version,
whereas an FIR No.226/2012 was got registered by Hassan Muhammad brother of
Hussain Muhammad against the complainant party under section 302/34 PPC of the
same incidence. It is contended that the applicant namely, Zarif Khan is the
eye-witness in the above FIR, who has been falsely implicated at the instance
of injured Abdul Rahim, whose statement was recorded after the delay of about
10 days, which has not been explained, whereas applicant Asif Khan is cousin of
the deceased. Per learned counsel, statement of prosecution witness Gulzar, who
is real brother of injured Abdul Rahim was also recorded after delay of 20 days,
which is not explained, whereas the entire story has been concocted in
connection with the counter murder of deceased namely Hussain. Per learned
counsel, neither any recovery of weapon has been effected from the possession
of applicants nor any identification has been made. It has been contended that
this is a case of counter version wherein the applicants have not been
nominated in the FIR, hence the matter requires further inquiry. In support of
his contention, learned counsel has placed reliance.
1.       Mehmood
Ahmed v. The State 1995 SCMR 127
2.       Imran
Ashraf v. The State 2001 SCMR 424
3.       Shoaib
Mehmood Butt v. Iftikhar-ul-Haq 1996 SCMR 1845 
 
 
4.       Conversely,
learned counsel for the complainant has opposed the grant of bail to the
present applicants and submits that the applicants have been nominated by the
injured Abdul Rahim, whereas there is no delay in lodging the FIR. It is
further stated that since the parties are known, therefore, there is no need
for identification. However, while confronted as to why the name of the
applicant was not mentioned in the FIR if the parties knew each other, learned
counsel could not explain such position. Learned APG has adopted the arguments
of the counsel for the complainant. 
 
5.       I
have heard both the learned counsel as well as APG and perused the record of
the case. On tentative assessment, it appears that this is a case of counter
version as two F.I.Rs of the same incidence have been registered on the same
day by both the parties whereas the applicants have not been nominated in the
FIR. In FIR No.225/2012 registered by the applicants party one Hussain having
received bullet injuries has succumbed to death. There is yet to be determined
as to which party is aggressor and which party has been aggressed upon. Both
the parties are reportedly known to each other, however, the applicants have
been implicated after a considerable delay which appears to have not been
explained. No recovery has been effected from the applicants, who are behind
the bar since 04.12.2012 when their bail before arrest was rejected. In the
case of Shoaib Mehmood Butt v. Iftikhar-ul-Haq 1996 SCMR 1845, the
Hon’ble Supreme Court has held as under:
“16.   In case
of counter-versions arising from the same incident, one given by complainant in
F.I.R and the other given by the opposite party case-law is almost settled that
such cases are covered for grant of bail on the ground of further enquiry as
contemplated under section 497 (2) Cr.P.C. In such cases normally, bail is
granted on the ground of further enquiry for the reason that the question as to
which version is correct is to be decided by the trial Court which is supposed
to record evidence and also appraise the same in order to come to a final
conclusion in this regard. In case of Fazal Muhammad v. Ali Ahmad (1976 SCMR
391) in cross-cases the High Court granted bail to the accused on the ground
that there was probability of counter-version being true as some of the accused
had received injuries including a grievous injury on the head of one accused.
It was held by this Court that in such circumstances the High Court was right
in granting bail and no interference was warranted. In the same context,
reference can be made to the case of Mst. Shafiqan v. Hashim Ali and others
(1972 SCMR 682).” 
 
6.       I am
of the opinion that the applicants have made out a case for grant of bail at
this stage as the matter requires further inquiry.  Accordingly, applicants are admitted to bail subject to
furnishing surety in the sum of Rs.1,50,000/- (Rupees One Lac Fifty Thousand)
each and P.R. Bond in the like amount to the satisfaction of the Nazir of this
Court.
 
7.       Needless to observe
that the observations made hereinabove are tentative in nature and the learned
trial court shall not be prejudiced by any such observations and shall decide
the case on merits in view of the evidence available on record.
 
                JUDGE 
  



