
















ORDER SHEET
IN THE HIGH COURT OF SINDH, BENCH AT SUKKUR

Crl. Bail Application No.S- 225 of 2021.

­­­
1.     
For Orders on office objection. 
2.    
For hearing of Bail Application
03-05-2021.
            Mr. Miran
Bux Shah, advocate for applicant
Mr.
Aftab Ahmed Shar, APG for the State. 
>>>>>>>…<<<<<<<<
Irshad Ali Shah, J; It
is alleged that the applicants with rest of the culprits after having formed an
unlawful assembly and in prosecution of their common object by making trespass
into house of complainant Sain Bux, caused him, PWs Bashir Ahmed, and Mst.
Shahzadi lathies, butt and hatchets blows with its back side, with intention to
commit their murder and went away by misappropriating gold chain and Rs.
20,000/- of the complainant, for that the present case was registered.
2.         The applicants on having been refused
pre-arrest bail by learned Additional Sessions Judge-IV, Khairpur, have sought
for the same from this Court by way of instant bail application under Section
498-A Cr.P.C.
3.         It is contended by learned counsel for
the applicants that applicants being innocent have been involved in this case
falsely by the complainant party on account of its dispute with them over
landed property; the FIR of the incident has been lodged with delay of about eight
hours; there is counter version of the incident and offence alleged against the
applicants is not failing within prohibitory clause of section 497 (ii) Cr.P.C,
therefore the applicants are entitled to grant of pre-arrest bail as they are
apprehending unjustified arrest at the hands of the police which is motivated
by the complainant party.
4.        Learned DPG for the State has opposed to
grant of pre-arrest bail to the applicants by contending that they have
actively participated in commission of incident.
5.         I have considered the above arguments
and perused the record.
6.        The FIR of the incident has been lodged
with delay of about eight hours; such delay could not be over looked. Whether
the injuries with lathies, butt and back side of the hatchets were caused to
the complainant and his witnesses with intention to commit their murder? It
requires determination at trial. There is counter version of the incident,
which party is aggressor and which party is aggressed upon? it also requires determination
at trial. Nothing has been brought on record, which may prove the ownership of
the complainant over the gold chain, which is allegedly misappropriated in the
present case. The parties are said to be disputed over landed property. In
these circumstances, the applicants are found entitled to grant of pre arrest
bail on point of further inquiry and malafide. 
7.         In view of above, interim pre-arrest
bail already granted to the applicants is confirmed on same terms and
conditions.
8.        Instant Cr. Bail Application is disposed
of accordingly. 
 
   Judge
Nasim/Steno.
 
 



