



ORDER SHEET




ORDER SHEET 
HIGH COURT OF SINDH, KARACHI
       
Cr.Bail
Application No.1028 & 1142 of 2011 
  
Date                                    Order with signature of Judge
 
                   Present: Mr.
Justice Gulzar Ahmed
                             Mr.
Justice Muhammad Ali Mazhar
 
 
Cr. Bail
Application No.1028/2011
 
Muhammad
Haseeb Khan 
versus
The
State
 
 
Cr.Bail
Application No.1142/2011
 
Syed
Hashim Raza,
versus
The
State
 
 
Date of hearing: 03.11.2011.
 
Ms. Ismat Mehdi, Advocate for the applicant
in Cr.Bail Application No.1028/2011.
 
Mr. Shahab Sarki, Advocate for the applicant
in Cr. Bail Application No.1142/2011.
 
Mr. Khaleeq Ahmed, Advocate for the complainant.
 
Mr. Ashiq Raza, DAG.
 
 
Muhammad
Ali Mazhar, J. :-  The applicants have applied post
arrest bail in crime No.24/2011 lodged at police station FIA, CBC Karachi under
Section 409, 420, 468, 471, 477-A, 34 PPC read with Section 5 (2) of the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947.
 
1.
Brief facts as narrated in the FIR are that on 17.05.2011, complainant Muhammad
Majeed Awan, AVP/Manager, National Bank of Pakistan, KDA Civic Center Branch,
Karachi lodged the complaint that daily income tax and withholding tax on motor
vehicle tax is received by Excise & Taxation Department on their counters,
as per practice amount is to be deposited in the National bank of Pakistan KDA
Civic Center Branch, Karachi by the same evening at about 6-7 p.m. which was being
received by Muhammad Haseeb Khan, Operation Manager and Syed Hashim Raza Rizvi,
Senior Head Cashier, who were bound to transfer the said amount to National
bank of Pakistan, Income Tax Building Branch, Karachi. It was a legal
obligation of the Senior Head Cashier Syed Hashim Raza Rizvi to account for the
said amount into respective accounts daily and it was also the duty of Muhammad
Haseeb Khan, Operation Manager to verify that the amounts are being transferred
to the Link Branch accordingly. The allegations in the FIR are that the
Assistant Commissioner, Inland Revenue Zone-V, addressed a letter on 19.04.2011
asking the Manager Operation Muhammad Haseeb Khan to confirm whether the amount
for the period from July 2010 to March 2011 had been deposited into Federal
Treasury and he also asked to provide the evidence of such deposit. In
response, Muhammad Haseeb Khan vide his letter dated 27.04.2011 confirmed the deposit
of Rs.639,963,747/- out of Rs.830,527,647/- for the aforesaid period in Federal
Treasury, however for remaining amount of Rs.190,564,300/, he contended that
the verification of remaining challans would be completed within few days.
Subsequently, the Assistant Commissioner, Inland Revenue, Regional Tax Zone-V,
in reply to the letter of Muhammad Haseeb Khan clarified that the total
un-deposited amount was Rs.261,411,407/-. Consequent upon the discovery of huge
shortage, the then Manager Inayatullah Ansari under the instructions of
controlling office asked Operation Manager Muhammad Haseeb Khan and Senior Head
Cashier Syed Hashim Raza Rizvi to immediately reconcile and verify the amount
and on their failure to do so, the complainant in presence of witnesses named in
the FIR, searched the drawers of cash department and found 71 challans
pertaining to the period from July 2010 to December 2010 amounting to
Rs.176,844,995/- of income tax/withholding tax in respect of motor vehicles tax
which did not bear the cash/transfer receipt stamps and signatures of the
cashier and joint custodian. It is further stated in the FIR that besides the
recovery of 71 challans, the remaining challans are not traceable with the
branch. A sum of Rs.261,411,407/- is alleged to have been embezzled by the
accused persons nominated in the FIR. The complainant further stated that
Muhammad Haseeb Khan, Operation Manager, Syed Hashim Raza Rizvi, Senior Head
Cashier In charge have embezzled the above amount while it was also duty and
responsibility of Aftab Ahmed lakho, Masood Ahmed, joint custodian and Muhammad
Kamran, Senior Head Cashier to deposit the embezzled amount with the link
branch, therefore, being employess of NBP, they have committed the offence of
criminal breach of trust, falsification of accounts, fraud and forgeries in the
capacity of public servants.
 
2.
Mr. Shahab Sarki, the learned counsel for the applicant, Syed Hashim Raza Rizvi
argued that there is delay of at least two months in lodging the FIR and the
case against the present applicant entirely depends upon the documentary
evidence. He further argued that there is no piece of documentary evidence
available with the prosecution to show that the applicant has misappropriated
any amount. The complainant Majeed Awan was only posted on 16.05.2011 and he
lodged the FIR on 17.05.2011 merely on the basis of hearsay evidence and
against the present applicant there are general allegations, which require
further inquiry into the alleged guilt of the applicant. So far as the recovery
of Rs.6 million from the applicant is concerned, he argued that said amount was
paid to the applicant by one Muhammad Imran as a part payment of sale of 4
air-conditioned coaches which has been mala fidely shown as embezzled amount. He
argued that the alleged offences do not fall within the prohibitory clause of
section 497 Cr.P.C. therefore, the applicant is entitled to the concession of
bail. He further pointed out an order passed by the learned divisional bench of
this court in Cr.Bail Application No.842/2011, which was moved by accused Aftab
Ahmed Lakho in the same crime, who was granted bail by the learned divisional
bench of this court vide order dated 21.09.2011 in which one of us (Gulzar
Ahmed,J.) was a member. The learned counsel argued that since the role of the
present applicant is not different  than the role of Aftab Ahmed Lakho,
therefore keeping in view the rule of consistency, he pleaded that the present
applicant is also entitled to the concession of bail.
 
3.
Ms. Ismat Mehdi, the learned counsel for applicant Muhammad Haseeb Khan argued
that the applicant is an innocent person and no offence has been committed by
him. She further argued that section 409 P.P.C is inapplicable as the applicant
has not committed criminal breach of trust in respect of any property. She
further argued that the allegation of criminal breach of trust is against the
Senior Head Cashier Syed Hashim Raza Rizvi, Muhammad Kamran and joint custodian
Aftab Ahmed Lakho. She further argued that no role has been assigned to Muhammad
Haseeb Khan and since the entire case is based on documentary evidence,
therefore unless the entire material is placed on the record during trial, the
case of present applicant requires further inquiry. She has also relied upon
the bail order of this court passed in the bail application of Aftab Ahmed
Lakho (supra) and argued that rule of consistency demands that the present
applicant be also granted bail. In support of her arguments, the learned
counsel relied upon 1995 SCMR 1249 (Chaudhry Shujat Hussain v. The State)
in which it was held that in case of bail court is not required to probe into
the matter but has to make a tentative assessment of the material produced to
ascertain whether there are reasonable grounds to believe that the accused has
committed the crime. The term “reasonable ground to believe” can be classified
at a higher pedestal than mere suspicion and allegation but not equivalent to
proved evidence. Learned counsel further relied upon 2010 YLR 2299 (Wasi
Ahmed v. The State) in which it was held that no recovery had been made
from the accused, case hinged merely on the documentary evidence collected by
the prosecution and there was no possibility of tampering with the same. Since
the State counsel conceded to the grant of bail, therefore the bail was granted
in this matter. The learned counsel next relied upon 2000 YLR 289 (Inamul Haque
v. The State) in which this court held that the gravity of offence looked
from the point of view of the quantum of amount embezzled is not the sole
determining factor for deciding the bail. Tentative assessment was to be made
by court while examining bail plea without probing into merits of the case
restricting itself to material placed before it by the prosecution to see
whether some tangible evidence was available against the accused. Further
reliance has been placed on 2011 U.C. 283 (Tariq Hashmi v. The State) in
which, the learned divisional bench of this court has held that nothing has
been brought on record to show that the applicant had knowingly connived with
other accused for providing Ijra loan on the basis of manipulated documents.
Consequently, the applicant was admitted to bail in this case.
 
4.
Conversely, Mr. Khaleeq Ahmed, the learned counsel for the complainant opposed
the bail application. He argued that recovery was made from both the applicants
and in the FIR specific role has been assigned to them. He further argued that
after receiving the amount, both the applicants were issuing computer generated
receipts prepared by their own and the same were being issued under their
signatures. The learned counsel shown us various computer generated receipts
issued by both the applicants under their own signatures w.e.f. 01.07.2010 to
31.03.2011. The learned counsel further pointed out 71 paid challans issued by
the present applicants, but this amount was never transferred to the NBP,
Income Tax Building Branch, Karachi (Link Branch) and in order to substantiate
his contention, he has also shown us the bank statement of Account No.002029-1,
Motor Vehicles Tax Collection Accounts, National Bank of Pakistan, KDA Civic
Centre Branch, Karachi w.e.f. 01.07.2010 to 31.03.2011 but no payment entries
were found in the bank statement showing any amount received through 71 paid
challans. The learned counsel further shown us a statement showing daily
collection of cash/pay orders for the month of July 2010, National Bank, KDA
Civic Centre Branch, Karachi for the month of July 2010 on which again the
signatures of both the applicants are available. The learned counsel further
pointed out page No.6 of challan available in court file to show that various
files including Riyal, Dollars, Bonds, Pakistani currency were recovered from
applicant Muhammad Haseeb, which according to the learned counsel Ms.Ismat
Mehdi, having worth of Rs.31,47,500/- while Rs.60 Lacs were recovered from
another applicant Syed Hashim Raza Rizvi. He further argued that co-accused
Masood Ahmed is also in jail and his bail application was rejected twice by the
trial court.
 
5.
The learned DAG Mr. Ashiq Raza has also opposed the bail application on the
ground that embezzlement of huge amount is involved in this case and in view of
the documents produced by the prosecution before this court, it is clear that 
specific role has been assigned to both the applicants in the FIR and in view
of the documents produced by the complainant/prosecution, it is very much clear
that both the applicants are involved in the crime and recovery was also made
from them which is an admitted fact, therefore applicants are not entitled to
be released on bail.
 
6.
After hearing the arguments of the learned counsel, we have reached to an
irresistible conclusion that both the applicants have been implicated in the
FIR with specific role and it is not denied that they have not signed the
computer generated receipts and or 71 paid challans which amount has never been
transferred to the government exchequer. It is also a fact that recovery was made
from both the applicants which is clearly mentioned in the challan. It is also
case of prosecution that 71 more challans were recovered from drawer of cash
department in presence of witnesses which did not bear the cash transfer stamp
and signature of cashier. So far as the earlier bail order passed by this court
in Cr.Bail Application NO.842/2011 is concerned, it is clear from the order
itself that both the applicants cannot claim bail on the ground of rule of
consistency. We have seen the bail order in which it was held that the
responsibility of cash/pay orders and deposit the same in National Bank of
Pakistan appears to be of Muhammad Haseeb and Syed Hashim Raza Rizvi and not of
the applicant Aftab Ahmed Lakho. The court in the above bail application had
also examined the statements signed by four officials namely, (i) Ali Muhammad
Baghio, Chief Accounts Officer, Motor Registration Wing, Karachi (ii) Waheed
Shaikh, Excise & Taxation Officer (iii) Syed Hashim Raza Rizvi and (iv)
Muhammad Haseeb and went on to hold that prima facie it does not show that the
applicant Aftab Ahmed had misappropriated the pay orders, therefore the bail
was granted to him. However, in the case in hand, specific role to both the
present applicants have been assigned in the FIR and the complainant’s counsel
has shown the documents which were admittedly signed by both the applicants,
therefore the applicant cannot claim rule of consistency. It is also an
important aspect to mention that though the findings in the bail order are always
tentative in nature but in the same crime while allowing bail to co-accused
Aftab Ahmed Lakho, the divisional bench of this court has already held that the
responsibility of daily collection of cash/pay orders and to deposit the same
into National Bank of Pakistan appears to be of applicants Muhammad Haseeb Khan
and Syed Hashim Raza Rizvi and nothing is available new on the record for us to
take a contrary view or to hold that the case of applicants require further
inquiry as argued by the learned counsel for the applicants. 
 
7.
Under Sub-section 6 of Section 5 of the Offences in Respect of Banks (Special
Courts) Ordinance 1984,  it is provided that accused person shall not be
released on bail by a special court or by any other court, if there appear
reasonable grounds for believing that he has been guilty of a scheduled
offence. After examining the documents produced by the complainant in this
case, we have no hesitation to hold that there are reasonable grounds to
believe that the applicants have committed the offences as alleged against them
and caused loss to the exchequer. So far as the question of further inquiry is
concerned, it is  well settled proposition of law that every hypothetical
question which can be managed would not make the same a case of further inquiry
simply for the reason that same can be answered by the trial subsequently after
evaluation of evidence. Accused in order to release on bail must show that
there is no reasonable ground to believe  that he has committed the offence as
alleged against him. Mere possibility of further inquiry which exists almost in
every criminal case is no ground for treating the matter as one under
subsection (2) of Section 497 CrPC. While deciding the bail application, the
court need not to enter into upon detail appreciation and examination of
evidence, however, the question cannot be decided in vacuum and the court has
to look at the material available to form a tentative opinion as to whether the
accused is prima facie connected with the offence. The case law relied upon by
the learned counsel for the applicant are distinguishable in which under
different facts and circumstances, bail was allowed to the applicants.
 
8.
For the foregoing reasons, the bail applications are dismissed. However, it is
clarified that observations made in this order are tentative in nature and same
shall not prejudice the case of either party. Since huge misappropriation/embezzlement
of government exchequer is involved, therefore, the learned trial court is
directed to conclude the trial preferably within a period of three months. 
 
                                                                                      Judge
 
                                                Judge



