






ORDER SHEET









ORDER SHEET
IN THE HIGH COURT
OF SINDH, AT KARACHI
Cr.Bail
Application No. 146 of 2016
Cr.Bail
Application No. 147 of 2016
                                                                                                                                                                                
          Date                             Order with signature of Judge                               
1.For orders on M.A. No.824/2016.
2.For orders on office objection & reply of Advocate at flag
‘A’.
3.For orders on M.A. No.825/2016.
3.FOR hearing of bail application. 
 
 
26th
January, 2016.
Syed Mohsin Imam Wasti, Advocate a/w applicants.
>>>>>>
<<<<<<
 
1.       Urgent motion
is accorded. 
3.       Exempted
subject to all just exceptions. 
2&4.    Learned counsel
for the applicants, inter alia, submits that the applicants have falsely been
implicated in this case by the complainant by involving him in theft of
valuable documents. Per learned counsel the documents were stolen
by someone from the motorcycle of applicant Muhammad Nasir. Learned counsel
further submits that it is not deliberate and intentional act on the part of
applicants but due to bona fide reasons more so the applicants certainly shall
not gain any benefit from the stolen documents. Learned counsel contended that
applicants are very much willing to appear before the trial court to face the
trial but having apprehension of humiliation, disgrace and maltreatment from
the hands of police after their arrest, they approached this Court for
necessary protection, hence by converting the instant
pre-arrest bail into protective bail, they may by granted protection. 
 
Since the applicants intend to appear before the trial
court to face the trial and seek further remedy in accordance with law, by
converting the instant pre-arrest bail into protective bail, without touching
the merits of the case, applicants are admitted to protective bail for seven
days from today on their furnishing solvent surety in the sum of Rs.50,000/- (Rupees fifty thousand only) each and P.R.Bond in the like amount to the satisfaction of the
Nazir of this court. 
 
Learned counsel submits that it is 04:30 p.m. and office
time has already been over, therefore, applicants may be allowed to furnish
surety by tomorrow. Order accordingly. 
 
This concession of protective bail shall cease to have
force on 01.02.2016 or when the applicants surrender themselves before the
trial court, whichever is earlier. This bail application alongwith office
objection stands disposed of in the above terms. Office is directed to show
disposal of instant bail applications as Protective Bail.  
 
 
 
 
Aamir/PS
                                                                         J U D G E 



