



ORDER SHEET




IN THE HIGH
COURT OF SINDH AT KARACHI 
 
Criminal Bail Application No. 825
of 2016 
                                                                                                          
DATE          ORDER
WITH SIGNATURE OF JUDGE
                                                                                                          
 
 
01.07.2016
 
Mr. Muhammad Haseeb Jamali, advocate
for the 
applicant.
Mr. Muhammad Javed
K.K. Standing Counsel. 
 
*-*-*-*-*
 
O R D E R
 
 
SHAHNAWAZ TARIQ,J:- Through the captioned post
arrest bail application, applicant Rehan Afzal son of Muhammad Afzal has
impugned order dated 19.05.2016, passed by Learned Special Judge (Central)-II,
Karachi whereby his earlier bail application was declined. 
 
2.       Precisely, the
relevant facts spelt out from instant application are that complainant Muhammad
Anwar, Assistant Director, FIA lodged FIR stating therein that during the
course of enquiry it has been prima facie established that Sheikh Muhammad
Munawar, Chief Executive, M/s. Azhar Corporation Pvt. Ltd., 10-Km, Sargodha
Road, Faisalabad, engaged in manufacturing of Banaspati Ghee, Cooking oil and
Laundry Soap with the brand name “Gai Banaspati Ghee and Gai Cooking Oil. On 28th
February, 2014 the Utility Stores Corporation, Head Office Islamabad published
Tender Notices inviting interested ISO certified parties for registration for
supply of Ghee/Oil in “utility” brand name whereby cut-date of filing
application was set as 18th March, 2014. M/s. Azhar Corporation Pvt.
Ltd. was not an ISO certified company, inspite of that they participated in tender
process in connivance/collusion with the senior management of Utility Stores Corporation,
Head Office, Islamabad. The accused firm was given ample time period illegally to
provide ISO Certificate by USC management. USC officials at Head Office
Islamabad referred accused Sheikh Muhammad Munawar to accused Mian Muhammad
Khalid CEO M/s. Fords Pakistan Ltd and M/s. Wismore Pakistan Pvt. Ltd.,
510-Kawish Crown, Shahrah-e-Faisal, Karachi for preparing fake/bogus/forged ISO
certificate. Accused Mian Muhammad Khalid on receipt of payment of
Rs.4,881,923= which were paid to him by Azhar Corporation through banking
channel, prepared and handed over to accused supplier  fake/forged/bogus ISO
certificates purported to have been issued by SGS Switzerland which have been signed
by accused Mian Muhammad Khalid on the basis of which M/s. Azhar Corporation
(Pvt.) Ltd., participated in tender process in connivance/collusion with
applicant/accused Rehan Afzal, Project Officer USC who facilitated M/s. Azhar
Corporation (Pvt.) Ltd by not getting verified documents/profiles submitted by
accused firm by misusing his official position for ulterior motives, as a result
of which accused firm enter into an agreement with USC for supply of Utility
Brand Name Ghee and Oil and subsequently supplied the same for a period of more
than one year and made business with USC to the tune of Rs.615,401,608/=The FIA
after registration of crime and usual investigation submitted interim charge
sheet against the present applicant.
 
3.       Learned counsel for
applicant contended that applicant is innocent and has falsely been implicated
in instant crime by superior with ulterior motive as neither applicant was
competent authority to participate in the process of awarding tenders nor he
was member of the committee who approve the bids submitted by participants-companies.
Learned counsel further emphasized that all the meetings were conveyed by the
superior officers of the projects while applicant is a subordinate officer
having no direct or indirect involvement to sign or deal with the supply of
Ghee and Oil and even his name was not mentioned in FIR nor any specific rule
has been assigned to him to deal with the approval of tender nor by his any act
any loss caused to the government exchequer. It is further urged that no
corroborative evidence has been collected by the Investigating Officer to
involve the applicant regarding the commission of alleged offence.  Learned
counsel further contended that section 409 PPC is not applicable upon the
allegation leveled against the applicant while rest of sections are punishable
upto seven years, hence alleged offence does not fall with the prohibitory clause
of Section 497(2), Cr.P.C. Learned counsel pointed out minutes of the meeting
held on different dates and vehemently contended that none of the meeting ever
applicant attended nor he signed any document, as alleged by the prospection.
He further contended that applicant prima-facie sent email dated 03.12.2015 to
check and verify authenticity of attached ISO Certificate issued by SGS of M/s.
Azhar Corporation Pvt. Ltd., which was replied through email by System and
Service Certification that provided that certificates are fake even then General
Manager Projects vide letter dated 18.12.2015 addressed three companies whereby
black listed them, however, M/s. Azhar Corporation Pvt. Ltd instead of black
listing them gave them opportunity to clarify regarding the fakeness of
documents. Learned counsel further contended that applicant is not signatory
nor executants of any document nor attended any meeting as a member of
committee and even no departmental proceedings have ever initiated against him;
that no part of any noting of the official documents was signed by him and only
to save their skins Senior General Managers have mala-fidely implicated the
accused and no documentary proof has been collected by the Investigating
Officer to implicate the applicant regarding commission of alleged offense.
Learned counsel lastly contended that main accused Shaikh Muhammad Munawar, who
is beneficiary, has already been granted bail by the learned trial Court on
medical ground as well as on  merits while case of applicant is on better
footing that he was deprived from concession of bail. Learned counsel relief
upon the cases reported in 2014 MLD 1315; 1992 MLD 1428; 2014 MLD 285; 2014 YLR
350; 2007 SCMR 843; 1991 MLD 1095; 2016 PCrLJ 353 and 1994 MLD 1360. 
 
4.       While controverting
the above submission, learned Standing Counsel vehemently contended that applicant
being subordinate officer has not discharged his duties property as he has not
examine the documents submitted by M/s. Azhar Corporation, however, he candidly
submitted that the applicant was not member of any committee nor applicant
signed any documents while issuance the tender to M/s. Azhar Corporation.
Learned standing Counsel further contended that applicant is not entitled for
concession of bail at this stage.
 
5.       Perusal of available
record and consideration of arguments advanced by the parties emanate that name
of the applicant has not transpired in FIR but subsequently in challan he was
implicated in instant crime alleging that applicant did not examine properly
the documents submitted by M/s. Azhar Corporation and has not discharged is
duties properly. Perusal of minutes of meeting from the year 2013 and onward
neither he participated any meeting nor he was member of committee nor did he
sign any documents. Apparently applicant was not responsible to verify and
scrutinize any important document nor did he play any role in approving the
tender in favour of M/s. Azhar Corporation in particular notification took
place in July 2014 as applicant was posted as a Project Officer working under G.M.
Project in October 2015. Admittedly, applicant was not a member of committee
and such approval was made by General Manger for execution of M.O.U. with the
parties. Perusal of entire record reflects that applicant neither made any
correspondence with M/s. Azhar Corporation nor signed nay documents. Moreover,
applicant is not beneficiary with regard to the transaction made between USC BL
and the accused firm. Entire record is silent as no departmental enquiry has
been initiated against the applicant in support of this crime. Investigating
officer made no recovery from the applicant and even no lost has been cuased by
his act to the government exchequer; that instant crime occurred in the year
2014 while FIR has been lodged in 2016 without furnishing specific explanation
in this regard, conversely, applicant sent email for verification of
certificate submitted by the accused firm which was found to be fake. It is significant
to mention that no response of said email dated 03.12.2015; that four companies
were found to be submitted fake ISO certificate but only M/s. Pakistan Oil and
Ghee Industries, M/s. Vismore Pakistan Karachi and M/s. Rania Oil and Ghee
Mills were black listed by General Manager vide letter dated 16.05.2016 and after
about a week on 21.05.2016 said G.M. Projects issued letter to M/s. Azhar
Corporation Ltd. whereby providing opportunity to clarify its position
regarding identical allegation were leveled against all four firms; that prospection
has failed to point out at the moment any act of applicant that ceases losses
to the government exchequer; that after completion of investigation challan has
been submitted and applicant is no more required further for investigation
hence his further detention will not serve any useful purpose that main accused
Shaikh Muhammad Munawar of M/s. Azhar Corporation has already enlarged on bail
by the learned trial Court vide order dated 19.05.2016 on the ground of ailment
as well as merits.
 
6.       Considering the facts
and circumstances referred supra, the applicant has succeeded to make out a
case of further enquiry as envisaged under subsection 2 of section 497 Cr.P.C.
Resultantly, applicant is admitted to post arrest bail subject to his
furnishing solvent surety in sum of Rs.500,000/- (Rupees one five only) and PR
bonds in the like amount to the satisfaction of the Nazir of this Court. The
Nazir shall transfer the surety to the trial Court after a week’s time.  
 
7.       The observations made
above are tentative in nature and trial Court shall decide the subject case
purely on its merits expeditiously. 
 
 
         J U D G E
Zahid Biag



