



ORDER SHEET




                                                  

IN THE HIGH COURT OF SINDH AT KARACHI
 
                         
Cr. Bail Application No.861 of 2012
 



Date


Order with signature of Judge



 
For
Hearing.
 
24.09.2012
 
 
          
Mr. Shamshad Ali Qureshi, advocate for the applicant
          
Mr. Abdullah Rajput, APG a/w I.O/SIP Zulfiqar.
                                   
-----------
 
 
O R D E R
 
Aqeel
Ahmed Abbasi,J:    Being
aggrieved and dis-satisfied with the order dated 07.08.2012 passed by IVth
Additional Sessions Judge, Karachi East in Crime No.127/2011 under section
302/324/353/186/34 PPC registered at Police Station Bahadurabad, Karachi,
whereby the bail was declined to the present applicant, the applicant has
approached this Court under Section 498 Cr.P.C. seeking his release on bail. 
2.       The
prosecution story as narrated in the FIR and recorded by the learned IVth
Additional Sessions Judge, is as under:
“Briefly narrated the facts as
glanced from the FIR are that complainant SIP Ghulam Asghar lodged FIR on
30.05.2011 at PS Bahadurabad stating therein that he alongwith his sub-ordinate
staff was busy in patrolling. During patrolling at about 1700 hours he received
telephonic message from PC Irfanullah that he alongwith PC Taj Muhammad were
busy in patrolling in the area. During patrolling when they reached at Ameer
Khusro Road Kingri House one Suzuki cultus golden colour in which 4 suspected
persons were sitting PC Taj Muhammad gave signaled to stop them, but one of
them fired upon him to which he become injured and the culprits are going
towards Band chowk. On this information he alongwith subordinate staff
proceeded towards Band chowk. The said car was stopped by them, on seeing
police party the accused persons tried to escape from the car. Police party
succeeded in arresting two culprits, who disclosed their names as Nisar
Muhammad and Usman Yousuf. They also disclosed the name of absconding accused
as Usman Ali and Zohaib Iqbal. Police brought the accused at PS and lodged the
FIR, hence present second bail application.”
 
3.       It is
inter alia contended by the learned counsel for the applicant that the
applicant is innocent and has been falsely implicated in the instant crime,
whereas neither he was arrested from the spot nor any recovery whatsoever has been
effected from his possession. Per learned counsel, the applicant was granted
protective bail from this court vide order dated 18.07.2012 whereaftrer
approached before he learned trial court to seek pre-arrest bail, however, vide
order dated 07.08.2012 his bail has not been confirmed. Per learned counsel,
the applicant has been implicated in the instant crime on the alleged statement
of two co-accused persons who have already been granted bail by this court,
whereas the third co-accused has been admitted to bail by the learned trial
court. It is contended that during pendency of the trial and when the applicant
was granted protective/bail before arrest the applicant cooperated with the
investigation whose statement was recorded by the concerned I.O., however, no
recovery whatsoever has been effected. It is further contended that the case of
the applicant requires further inquiry, whereas he cannot be convicted on the
basis of statement of co-accused persons before the police. Per learned
counsel, he is behind the bar since his arrest and 7.8.2012, whereas the matter
is not proceeding before the learned trial court. In support of his contention,
learned counsel for the applicant has placed reliance on the following
judgments.
1.       Mitho
Pitafi v. The State 2009 SCMR 299
2.       Noor
Zameer v. The State SBLR 2011 Sindh 1368
3.       Ghulam
Mujtaba Qadri v. The State 2012 SCMR 662
4.       Manzoor
Hussain v. The State 2011 SCMR 902
5.       Jaffar and
others v. The State 1980 SCMR 784
6.       Dilmurad
v. The State 2010 SCMR 1178
7.       Irfanullah
and others v. The State 2012 YLR 1133
8.       Muhammad
Murrad v. The State 2012 YLR 1309
9.       Bashir v.
Muhammad Saleem  2012 YLR 666
10.     Anwar Ali
alias Karriri v. The State 2012 YLR 934 
 
4.       Conversely,
learned APG present alongwith I.O of the case, though could not controvert the
submissions made by the learned counsel for the applicant, however, submitted
that since the applicant has been implicated by co-accused with an overt role,
therefore, his case is distinguishable from the case of the other co-accused
who have been granted bail. He has further submitted that there is other
material which shows that the present applicant has hired a car which was used
in the incident, therefore, there is a possibility that the applicant would
have committed the alleged crime.
5.       I have
heard the learned counsel for the applicant as well as learned APG and perused
the record. From tentative assessment of the record it appears that except
nomination of the applicant by co-accused persons in the instant crime there
appears that no material has been shown by the prosecution so far which may
directly implicate the applicant/accused with the alleged crime, whereas in the
absence of any incriminating material and on the basis of mere statement of
co-accused recorded before the police, the prosecution story cannot be
considered as free from doubt. Accordingly, I am of the view that the case of
the applicant requires further inquiry.
6.       In view of
hereinabove, the applicant is admitted to bail subject to furnishing surety in
the sum of Rs.5,00,000/- (Rupees Five Lac) with P.R. Bond in the like amount to
the satisfaction of the learned trial court.
7.       Needless
to observe that the observations made herein are tentative in nature and shall
not prejudice the merits of the case, which may be examined strictly in
accordance with law and on the basis of evidence on record.
8.       However,
it is clarified that if, the applicant misuses the concession of bail in any
manner, the learned trial court shall be at liberty to proceed against the applicant
as per law.    
                                                                                          JUDGE
 


 
 



