
















ORDER SHEET
IN THE HIGH COURT OF SINDH, BENCH AT SUKKUR

Crl. Bail. Application No.S- 710 of 2020.

 
            For
hearing of Bail Application
23-04-2021.
            Mr. Deedar
Ali Chohan, advocate for applicant. 
Syed
Sardar Ali Shah Rizvi, DPG for the State. 
>>>>>>>…<<<<<<<<
IRSHAD
ALI SHAH, J.- It is alleged that the applicant
with rest of the culprits, in furtherance of their common intention caused iron
rod blow to complainant Abdul Ghani, for that the present case was registered. 
2.         The applicant on having been refused
pre-arrest bail by learned Additional Sessions Judge, Gambat, has prayed for
the same from this Court by way of instant application u/s 498 Cr.P.C.
3.         It is contended by learned counsel for
the applicant that the applicant being innocent has been involved in this case
falsely by the complainant in order to satisfy his dispute with him over inheritance
of the property; the FIR has been lodged with delay of about one month; offence
alleged against the applicant is not falling within the prohibitory clause of
Section 497 (ii) Cr.PC and co-accused Abdul Nabi has already been admitted to
bail by learned Additional Sessions Judge, Gambat. By contending so, he prayed
for pre-arrest bail for the applicant on point of further inquiry and malafide.

4.        Learned D.P.G for the State has opposed
to grant of pre-arrest bail to the applicant by contending that the applicant
has actively participated in commission of the incident.  
5.         I have considered the above arguments
and perused the record. 
6.        The FIR has been lodged with delay of about
one month; such delay having not been explained plausibly could not be over
looked; the parties admittedly are disputed with each other over inheritance of
the property. Co-accused Abdul Nabi has already been admitted to pre-arrest
bail by learned Additional Sessions Judge, Gambat and the offence alleged
against the applicant is not falling within prohibitory clause of Section 497 (II)
Cr.PC, in that situation, it is rightly being contended by learned counsel for the
applicant that a case for grant of pre-arrest bail to the applicant is made out on the point
of further inquiry and malafide.

7.         In case of Khalil Ahmed Soomro and others Vs. The State     (PLD 2017 SC-730), the Hon’ble Apex
Court has held that;
“----Ss. 498 &
497---Constitution of Pakistan, Art. 185(3)---Penal Code (XLV of 1860), Ss.
337-A(i), 337-F(i), 337-F(vi), 337-L(2) & 504---Shajjah-i-khafifah,
ghayr-jaifah damiyah, ghayr-jaifah munaqqillah, other hurt, intentional insult
with intent to provoke breach of peace---Pre-arrest bail, grant of---Mala fide
of complainant---Offences with which accused persons were charged were
punishable by way of imprisonment which did not fall within the prohibitory
part of S. 497, Cr.P.C.---When the accused persons were entitled to post arrest
bail, their prayer for  pre-arrest bail, if  declined,
would  be  a  matter  of  technicality
alone---Accused persons were likely to be humiliated and disgraced due to their
arrest at the hands of the local police---In the present case, it appeared that
net had been thrown wider and the injuries sustained by the victims except one
or two, had been exaggerated---Seemingly efforts had been made to show that the
offences  fell  within  such  provisions  of  law,  which  were punishable with five years' or seven
years' imprisonment---All said aspects, when considered
combindly, constituted mala fides on part of complainant party---Accused persons were
granted pre-arrest bail accordingly”.
8.        In view of above, the interim pre-arrest
bail already granted to applicant is confirmed on same terms and conditions. 
9.        The instant Crl. Bail Application is
disposed of accordingly. 
 
                                                                                                              J U D G E
Nasim/Steno.
 
 



