
















IN THE HIGH COURT OF SINDH, BENCH AT SUKKUR
Crl. Bail Application No.S-778 of 2021
 



Date of hearing 


               Order with signature of Judge



        
For hearing of bail application.
 
O R D E R.
31-01-2022.
 
                                Mr. Ali Raza Channa,
advocate for the applicant.
                             Mr. Shabbir Ali Bozdar,
advocate for the complainant. 
Mr. Aftab Ahmed Shar, APG
for the State.
 
AMJAD ALI SAHITO J., Through the
instant Application, applicant/accused Abdullah Sajid Bughio seeks post arrest
bail in Crime No. 295/2021, offence u/s 302, 34 PPC of PS Moro, District
Naushahro Feroze. Prior to this, he filed such application, but the same was
turned down by the Court of learned Additional Sessions Judge Moro vide order
dated 13-11-2021, hence he filed instant Crl. Bail Application.
2.      The
details and particulars of the FIR are already available in the bail
application and FIR, same could be gathered from the copy of FIR attached with
such application, hence, needs not to reproduce the same hereunder.
3.      Learned counsel for applicants submits that
applicant is innocent and has falsely been implicated in this case by the
complainant with mala fide intentions and ulterior motives and previous enmity
over the matrimonial disputed, which is admitted by the complainant in the FIR;
that there is inordinate delay of about seven hours in lodgement of the FIR for
which no plausible explanation has been furnished by the complainant;
applicant/accused has not caused any injury to the deceased, but mere
allegation against him that he and his father Soomar Bughio caught hold the
deceased Abdul Fattah from his arms and then co-accused Muhammad Ali Bughio
allegedly made straight fire of pistol upon the deceased; presence of the
applicant/accused at the place occurrence was not opined by the investigating officer,
during investigation as he at the time of alleged incident was available at
Karachi where he is doing labour, hence he was released u/s 497 Cr.P.C by the
police and his name was placed in column No.II of the challan, but learned
Magistrate had taken cognizance against him; that it is yet to be determined at
the time of trial as to whether the applicant along with co-accused has share his
common intention in the commission of offence, therefore, he pray for grant of
bail to the applicant/accused. He places his reliance on cases reported as Nisar Ahmed Vs. The State (2014 SCMR 27), Malik Waheed alias Abdul Hameed Vs. The State and another (2011 SCMR 1945), Subeh Sadiq alias Saabo alias Kalu Vs. The
State and others (2011 SCMR 1543),
Talib Jan Vs. The State and another (2012 SCMR 265), Muhammad Faisal Vs. The State and another (2020 SCMR 971) and Samiullah,
another Vs. Laiq Zada and another (2020
SCMR 1115).
4.      On the other hand, learned APG for the
State assisted by learned counsel for the complainant have vehemently opposed for
the grant of bail to the applicant/accused on the ground that he and his father
Soomar caught hold the deceased from his arms and then co-accused Muhammad Ali
made straight fire upon deceased Abdul Fattah, they are equally responsible for
common intention with co-accused in the commission of murder of deceased Abdul
Fattah, therefore he is not entitled for the concession of bail. Learned
counsel for the complainant places reliance on cases reported as Sidra Abbas Vs. The State and another (2020 SCMR 2089) and  Muhammad
Afzal Vs. The State (2012 SCMR 707).

5.      I have heard learned counsel for the
parties and have gone through the material available on record.
6.      Perusal of FIR reveals that applicant Sajid
and his father Soomar Bughio caught hold deceased Abdul Fattah from his arms
and then main accused Muhammad Ali Bughio made straight fire of pistol upon the
deceased and committed his murder, otherwise no overt act of causing any injury
to deceased is assigned to him. Moreover during the investigation conducted by
SDPO Shaheed Benazeerabad, it has come on record that at the time of incident,
the applicant/accused Sajid Ali was not present at the place of occurrence but
he was labouring at Baharia Town Karachi, therefore he and his father Soomar
Bughio were released after fulfilling all the legal and codal formalities and
their names were placed in column No.II of the challan, but learned Magistrate
has taken cognizance against them. The post-mortem report shows that deceased
has sustained a single firearm injury and no any scratch has been fined over
the dead body of deceased. In the case of Qurban
Ali Vs. The State (2017 SCMR 279), the Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan
has granted bail to the accused, who had not been attributed any overt act
during the occurrence, except the role of raising “Lalkara” and further held that in such circumstances, trial Court
had to determined, after recording pro and contra evidence, whether the
applicants were vicariously liable for the act of their co-accused and that
case was one of the further enquiry. Moreover learned counsel for the applicant
pleaded malafide on the part of complainant that due to previously enmity over
the matrimonial affairs, the present applicant is booked in this case. At bail
stage only tentative assessment is to be made. The case has been challaned and
the applicant/accused is in jail and he is no more required for further
inquiry. In the unreported case of Jahanzeb
Khan Vs. The State through A.G KPK and others Criminal Petition
No.594/2020, the Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan has held that;
          “4.....Petitioner’s
continue detention is not likely to improve upon investigative process, already
concluded, thus, he cannot be held behind the bars as a strategy for
punishment. A case for petitions’ release on bail stand made out. 
7.      In
view of above discussion, learned counsel for the applicant/accused has made
out a good case for grant of bail in the light of sub section (2) of Section
497 CrPC, hence the instant bail application is allowed, applicant/accused is
admitted to bail subject to furnishing his solvent surety in the sum of Rs. 200,000/-
(two lacs) and P.R bond in the like amount to satisfaction of learned trial
Court. If applicant/accused misuses the concession of bail, then trial Court is
at liberty to take action against him. 
8.      Needless
to mention that the observations made hereinabove are tentative in nature and
would not influence the Trial Court while deciding the case of the applicant on
merits. 
 
J U D G E
 
Nasim/P.A               



