






ORDER SHEET





 
 
IN THE HIGH COURT OF SINDH
AT KARACHI
 
 
Criminal Bail Application
No.512/2010.
 
 
Present:         Mr. Justice Gulzar Ahmed, &
                  Mr. Justice
Nisar Muhammad Shaikh
 
 
Applicant              :          Mohammad
Nawaz 
                                       through
Mr. Naimat Ali Randhawa Advocate.
 
Respondent                    :          The State 
                                       through Mr.
S. Ashiq Raza, DAG.
 
Date of Hearing          :          23.06.2010.
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
NISAR
MUHAMMAD SHAIKH, J. 
The applicant
Mohammad Nawaz has approached this Court for grant of bail after his earlier
bail application moved before the trial Court was dismissed vide order dated
27.04.2010 passed by learned Presiding Officer, Special Court (Offences in
Banks), Karachi. 
2.                                       
As per
FIR No.8/2010 registered on 25.03.2010 under section 420, 468, 471, 109 PPC on
the written complaint dated 25.03.2010 of the District Manager, UBL, City
Branch, I.I. Chundrigar Road, Karachi, a fraud was surfaced on 22.03.2010 when
Customer Services Manager of Defence Housing Society Branch received an email
dated 20.03.2010 from a customer/account holder namely Syed Asim Minhajuddin
informing that his account was debited on 17.03.2010 and 19.03.2010 for
Rs.879,700/- and Rs.898,900/- respectively, without his consent and knowledge.
On reviewing the account of Syed Asim Minhajuddin it revealed that his account
was debited 10 times online for total Rs.7,571,900/- from 22.02.2010 to
19.03.2010. It is further alleged in the said complaint/FIR that all the
transactions were under Inter Branch Transaction System and all the funds were
remitted to the account of accused Zafar Iqbal and his son Mohammad Nawaz
(applicant) therefore, upon checking it transpired that all the remittances
have been carried out by accused/applicant Mohammad Nawaz who is maintaining
his account with UBL, Defence Garden Branch, Karachi. It is further alleged in
the above complaint / FIR that on 22.03.2010 the applicant / accused Mohammad
Nawaz visited the branch once again for the online transaction to the account
of his father Zafar Iqbal at UBL, Landhi Branch, but as soon as the Customer
Services Manager came to know that another fraudulent inter branch
transaction  was about to take place,
she informed to the counter staff but the accused Mohammad Nawaz ran away. 
3.                                       
The
applicant /accused Mohammad Nawaz who was arrested on 25.03.2010, was sent up
with interim charge sheet No.14/2010 dated 08.04.2010 in which it was further
alleged that from the facts gathered on record, it has prima facie been
established that accused Mohammad Nawaz with criminal and common intention of
his father Zafar Iqbal as well as Syed Sajid Abbas Jafri, a bank staff and
Malik Sajid Ilyas Sajid Mazari, had managed fraudulent Uni-Remote Forms bearing
fake signatures of Syed Asim Minhajuddin and through fraudulent manners, got
Rs.7,571,900/- transferred from his account to the account of accused Zafar
Iqbal and also to his own account and on subsequent dates they withdrew such
amounts through different cheques and usurped the same.  
4.                                       
It is
argued by Mr. Naimat Ali Randhawa, learned counsel for the applicant that the
applicant has falsely been implicated in this case by the complainant in
collusion with F.I.A. to save their skin as all the details of the account
holders remain in safe custody of Operation Branch of the Bank and any outsider
can not get such information and since all transactions were made online
through remittance forms without having any cheque from the customer/account
holder and without any confirmation from him, and all such transactions were
processed and passed by the Operation Department of the complainant’s bank
therefore, it was the bank staff who has mis-used the accounts of the
applicant/accrued Mohammad Nawaz and his father Zafar Iqbal to usurp the huge
amount of the account holder Syed Asim. He further argued that the applicant is
a labourer having no concern with Syed Asim or his bank account and since all
the transactions were under Inter Branch Transaction System therefore the
incident has not taken place in the manner as narrated but in fact the staff of
the bank may have mis-appropriated and carried forged transactions therefore
the case needs further enquiry. He also argued that the alleged offences are
bailable except section 468 PPC which is also not covered by the prohibitory
clause of section 497(1) Cr.P.C. therefore, the applicant is also entitled for
bail specially when his case is on better footing than the co-accused Syed
Sajid Abbas Jafri who has already been granted bail by the trial Court on
15.04.2010.  In support of his
contentions, learned counsel for applicant also placed reliance on the cases
reported as 2010 MLD 758, 2010 PCrLJ 623, SBLR 2010 Sindh 742 and 485. 
5.                                       
On the
other hand, Mr. Ashiq Raza, learned DAG appearing for the State, vehemently
opposed the prayer of applicant contending that the case is still under
investigation and the recovery of the amount in question is yet to be made and
the remaining absconding accused Zafar Iqbal who is father of the present
applicant is yet to be arrested and after getting the remaining necessary
documents, the final challan will be submitted therefore the applicant is not
entitled for the concession of bail in this case of heinous nature.
6.                                       
We have
considered the above submissions and perused the relevant record which shows
that allegations leveled against the applicant/accused Mohammad Nawaz in the
very complaint/FIR for committing the offence of fraud, etc are corroborated by
documentary evidence as well as 161 Cr.P.C. statements of the PWs and
accordingly the applicant has caused substantial monetary loss to a account
holder of the Bank and thus a prima facie case as alleged in the FIR, has been
made out which connects the accused for commission of the alleged offence and
there appears no exceptional circumstances to exercise discretion in favour of
the applicant.  In the circumstances,
there appear reasonable grounds to believe that the accused was guilty of the
scheduled offence falling under the Ordinance 1984 relating to the offences in
respect of the Banks and the same can not be equated with the cases under PPC.
Moreover, the applicant/accused had since allegedly played a pivotal role in
commission of the alleged fraud etc and he was also the beneficiary of the
alleged transactions involving huge amount, therefore, his case was very
distinguishable to the case of co-accused Syed Sajid Abbas Jafri and as such the
principle of consistency was not attracted in the matter of applicant. 
7.                                       
The case
law as relied upon by learned counsel for the applicant is not relevant or
applicable to the case of present applicant as in the case of Pargat Masih
versus the State (2010 MLD 758) the petitioner was granted bail by a Single
Bench of Lahore High Court as the alleged forged Agreement to Sale was under
determination in a suit pending in the Civil Court and therefore it was held
that till the decision by civil Court the case against the petitioner was open
to further enquiry into his guilty. In another case of Raja Nadeem Ahmed versus
Javed Iqbal (2010 PCrLJ 623) a Single Bench of Peshawar High Court, admitted
the petitioner on bail as the complainant from whose account the amount in
question was withdrawn and credited to the account of petitioner, had totally
exonerated him and in these circumstances his case was held to be one of
further enquiry. Whereas the facts of remaining two cases, as relied upon by
learned counsel for the applicant, are altogether different to the facts of the
case in hand and therefore, the case of the applicant was not found fit to
extend him the concession of bail and it is for these reasons that the above
bail application of the applicant/accused Mohammad Nawaz was dismissed by this
Court vide a short order dated 23.06.2010. 
8.                                       
It was
however observed that the applicant/accused, without active connivance of the
bank staff/officers could hardly be successful in committing the alleged
offence therefore, the Investigating Officer namely Zia Hassan Rizvi who was
present in person, also submitted in this regard that no leniency would be
given by him to the responsible bank officials in the final challan which is
yet to be submitted before the trial Court.
9.                                       
Needless
to say that the above observations, being tentative in nature, would not be
taken by the trial Court so as to influence the merits of the case.  
                                                         J U D G E 
 
                                      J U D G E
Imran/PA



