







IN THE HIGH COURT OF SINDH, BENCH AT SUKKUR
 
 
CRL. BAIL APPLICATION NO. S-940 of
2010
 
Date of hearing:  22.08.2011
 
Applicant   :         Ghulam Nabi alias Papu, Kori Memon                                             through
Mr.Ghulam Shabbir Dayo Advocate.
 
Respondent:        State through Mr. Zulfiqar Ali Jatoi, Deputy 
Prosecutor General.
 
Complainant:      Khadim Hussain, Complainant, through 
Mr.Dareshani Ali Haider         Ada Advocate.
 
 
Muhammad Ali Mazhar--J., The applicant has brought this post
arrest bail in Crime No.58 of 2010, lodged under Section 302, 147, 148, 427,
504, 337-A (i), 337-F (i) and 114 P.P.C at Police Station Abad District Sukkur.
 
2. Succinctly, the facts of the prosecution case as
described by the complainant Khadim Hussain in the FIR are as under:-
 
“Complaint is that deceased Allah Wadhayo was my
brother-in-law. He was labour. About one month back, one boy of our Shoro
community and one boy of Kori community played race, our Shoro boy won the race,
on which Gul Hassan Kori and others annoyed and time to time used to exchange
harsh words to the people of Shoro community. On 1.5.2010, I was available at
my cabin and Allah Wadhayo, his sons each Asadullah and Sanaullah were also
present at their Ice shop. It was 6.50 of evening, when Munawar having thick
donkey stick, Ghulam Nabi having cot stick in hand, 3.Gul Hassan, 4.Irfan,
5.Anwar, 6.Fida Hussain, 7.Shahid, 8.Mehboob with lathis, all Kori Memon by
caste came. Anwar Kori instigated all the accused persons to commit the murder.
On his instigation, accused Munawar alias Diloo, 2.Ghulam Nabi alias Papoo,
3.Ghul Hassan, 4.Irfan Wazir and others started causing lathis blows to my
brother-in-law Allah Wadhayo and accused Fida Hussain caused lathi blows to
Asadullah and accused Shahid caused lathi blows to Asadullah and accused Shahid
caused lathi blows to Sanaullah and accused Mehboob caused lathi blows to me as
well. We all had become injured and the blood was oozing from our heads and
also sustained injuries on the other parts of the bodies. My brother-in-law
Allah Wadhayo had sustained serious injuries on head. We all cried. On cries,
our elder Rasool Bux came there. Thereafter we brought the all injured persons
at PS, from where after receiving the letter for treatment, went to civil
Hospital, Sukkur. Where I and other injured persons got treated as Allah
Wadhayo was seriously injured, hence, he was referred from Civil Hospital, Sukkur to Larkana Hospital for treatment, we removed him to Larkana and got him
treated. On the last night he succumbed to injuries and expired. Today in the morning,
we brought the dead body of deceased in presence of witnesses Asadullah and
Sanaullah, now have come and complained that above accused persons with their
common intention, arming with lathis and by committing riot, on the instigation
of Anwar caused us lathis blows and injured us and Irfan, Munawr alias Diloo
and Ghulam Nabi alias Papoo, Gul Hassan and others committed the murder of
Allah Wadhayo.” 
 
 
3. I have heard learned counsel for the applicant, complainant
and learned Deputy Prosecutor General for the State.
 
4. The learned counsel for the applicant argued that
there is a delay of three days in lodging of FIR, which has not been
satisfactorily explained by the complainant. On 09.09.2010, co-accused Fida
Hussain and Shahid Hussain have been granted bail by this Court. Learned
counsel further argued that on 08.05.2010, complainant Khadim Hussain lodged
his NC report, in which, he stated that Allah Wadhayo, Asadullah and Sanaullah
had sustained injuries but has not given the name of any accused that who
caused the injuries. Learned counsel further argued that there are counter
cases between the parties for the same incident as on 08.05.2010, Shahid
Hussain lodged his NC report at Police Station Abad, which is now FIR
No.141/2010, in which, it is reported that he, Irfan, Khalid, Mst.Shakeela and
Gul Hassan sustained injuries at the hands of complainant party and were
referred to G.M.M.C, Hospital, Sukkur for medical treatment. Learned counsel  went
 on  to  argue  that  there  are  counter cases between the 
 
parties and five persons from the
accused party had received injuries at the hands of complainant party,
therefore, it is yet to be determined at the stage of trial that which party
was aggressor. He further argued that in the FIR in question only general allegation
and role has been assigned to the present applicant that he along with
co-accused Munawar,  Gul Hassan and Irfan caused lathi injuries to deceased
Allah Wadhayo while in the NC and postmortem report only three injuries were
found on the body of deceased and injury 1 and 2 were declared fatal and
sufficient to cause the death of the deceased. It is not clear as yet that who
has caused the fatal blow which resulted the death of the deceased Allah
Wadhayo. It was further averred that the applicant was arrested on 11.5.2010
and the alleged weapon was recovered after delay of five days of his arrest
which was not found blood stained. He next contended that this is a fit case of
further enquiry so far as it relates to the present applicant and in support of
his arguments, the learned counsel relied upon 1980 SCMR 784, (Jaffar and
others vs. State), in this case honorable supreme court in a murder case
accepted the contention of the bail applicant that from the available material
it could not be said as to who caused the fatal injury which left room for
consideration as to the common intention of the others  accused to kill the
deceased  and therefore it was a case of further enquiry under section
497(2),Cr.P.C. This contention was accepted and the applicant was allowed bail
by honorable supreme court. He next relied upon 2004 SCMR 864, (Yaroo vs.
State) in this case also the honorable supreme Court in a case of murder
held that the allegations against the petitioner are of general nature. No
injury whatsoever had been attributed to him. He is in jail for last more than
one year, therefore, the petitioner was admitted to bail. The learned counsel referred
to another case law reported in 2002 P.Cr.L.J 494, (Shafi Muhammad vs. State),
in which, learned single judge of this Court held in a murder case that
medico-legal evidence though was in accordance with the ocular account but the
fact that as two of the injuries inflicted  upon the  deceased had been
certified to be sufficient to cause his death. It is yet to be seen as to who
had given the fatal blow since admittedly only one blow had been attributed to
the applicant. In this murder case also bail was granted. He next referred to 2011
MLD 555 (Hyder Bukhsh vs. State), in this case also the learned single judge
of this court in a murder case held that injuries suffered by the deceased
resulted from the blows of all the accused. Question as to who had caused fatal
injury to the deceased was yet to be determined. The counter case against the
complainant party was also registered so it still remains undecided as to who
was aggressor or victim. The accused was granted bail in this case also being a
case of further enquiry.
 
5. So far as the plea of counter case is concerned,
the learned counsel relied upon 2011 SCMR 606 (Abdul Hameed vs. Zahid
Hussain alias Papu Chaman Patiwala and others), in which the bail  granted
to the private respondents on the ground of counter case was challenged in the
apex Court, in which, the honourable supreme court held that High Court had granted
bail to the respondents on the ground that there were counter cases between the
parties and it was yet to be determined as to who was the aggressor, therefore,
their case falls within the ambit of section 497 (2), Cr.P.C requiring further
enquiry. It was further held that the incident of both the FIRs took place on
the same date time and place. Such point, however, could be properly threshed
out at the time of trial but presently no exception could be taken with regard
to said position. No tentative findings could be given as to which party was
the aggressor. High Court in circumstances, was justified in granting bail to
the respondents. In another judgment reported in 2011 MLD 908 (Qadir Bux vs.
State), the learned single judge of this Court held that the case was of
two versions and as to who was aggressor was yet to be determined. Bail had
already been granted to one party. If one party was granted bail, the other
party is also entitled to the same relief in case of counter version,
therefore, the accused were admitted to bail. 
 
6. The learned DPG opposed the bail application on the
ground that the present applicant along with three other accused caused fatal
blows to the deceased, which resulted his death. He further argued that cot
stick was recovered from the present applicant and Asadullah and Sanaullah both
have supported the version of the complainant in their statements recorded
under section 161, Cr.P.C.
 
7. The learned counsel for the complainant argued that
mere existence of a cross cases could not be a sufficient ground for grant of
bail. He further argued that sufficient material is available on record to
connect the applicant with the commission of crime and two eye witnesses
Asadullah and Sanaullah both supported the version of the complainant. He
further argued that three injuries were found on the body of the deceased and
injury No.1 and 2 were declared to be sufficient for causing the death.
However, he concedes that the complainant party is already on bail in the FIR
No.141/2010 lodged by the accused party. Nevertheless, he argued that the
applicant party lodged the FIR on 06.09.2010. This argument was rebutted by the
learned counsel for the applicant that on the very same day NC report was
lodged but the police officers were not registering the FIR, therefore, an
application was moved before the justice of peace for the registration of FIR
and such fact is clearly mentioned in Column No.05 of the FIR, therefore, there
was no delay on the part of complainant in the FIR No.141/2010.
 
8. After hearing the arguments and examining the case law
referred to by the learned counsel for the applicant, I am of the view that in
the FIR general allegations have been leveled against the applicant that he
along with three other co-accused caused lathi blows to the deceased Allah
Wadhayo and it is also a matter of fact that the postmortem report discloses
three injuries out of which injury No. 01 and 02 were declared fatal, but it is
again a matter of further enquiry that who had caused fatal blow as nothing is
mentioned in the FIR to show that who caused fatal injury to the deceased Allah
Wadhayo, which resulted his death. It is also an admitted fact that counter
case for the same incident has been lodged by the accused party being Crime
No.141/2010 and the learned DPG and learned counsel for the complainant both admitted
that in that FIR, the accused party has already been extended the facility of
bail, therefore, it is yet to be determined that who was the aggressor and who
was the victim. The case law relied upon by learned counsel for the applicant
relating to the question that who caused the fatal injury to the deceased is quite
applicable in the present facts and circumstances. It is also a fact that the
postmortem report shows only three injuries while in the FIR it has been
alleged that the present applicant along with three other accused have caused
blows to the deceased, which shows that at the same time four persons caused
the blows to the victim while in the postmortem report only three injuries are
shown which fact is also yet to be determined. I am profusely fortified by the enlightened
dictum laid down by the honorable supreme court reported in 1980 SCMR 784, in
which the bail was granted in a murder case on the ground that the material on
record not showing that which of the accused caused fatal injury leaving room
for consideration regarding common intention of other accused to kill the
deceased. The another decision on this point is also helpful to the applicant
for bail, which is reported as 2004 SCMR 864, in which again the honorable supreme
Court held that allegations against the accused were general in nature, no
injury whatsoever to the deceased has been attributed to the accused,
therefore, the accused was granted bail.
 
9. The basic concept of bail is that no innocent
person’s liberty is to be curtailed until and unless proved otherwise.
Principle of law is that every accused is innocent person until his guilt is
proved and it is also a well settled principle that law is not to be stretched
in favour of the prosecution but benefit of doubt will go to the accused even
at bail stage. Essential pre-requisite for the grant of bail by virtue of
sub-section (2) of section 497, Cr.P.C is that the Court must be satisfied on
the basis of opinion expressed by the police or the material placed before it
that there were reasonable grounds to believe that the accused was not guilty
of an offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life. It is also a well
settled principle that at the stage of bail deep scrutiny of evidence is not
permissible nor it is the requirement of law. However, this question can not be
decided in vacuum and the Court has to look at the material available for
arriving at a tentative opinion as to whether the accused is prima facie
connected with the commission of the offence or not.
 
10. For the foregoing reasons, I am of the considered
view that this is a fit case of further inquiry and at present, there are no
reasonable grounds for believing that the applicant has committed a
non-bailable offence, therefore, the applicant is granted bail subject to
furnishing solvent surety in the sum of Rs.200,000/- and P.R bond in the like
amount to the satisfaction of the trial Court.
 
11. Bail application stands disposed of in the above
terms.
 
Sukkur
26.8.2011                                                                                Judge 



