
















ORDER SHEET
IN THE HIGH COURT OF SINDH, BENCH AT SUKKUR

Crl. Bail Application No.S- 116 of 2021.

­­­
For hearing of bail application
26-04-2021.
            Haji
Shamsuddin Rajper, advocate for the applicant.
Mr.
Aneet Kumar Roopeja, advocate for the complainant. 
Syed
Sardar Ali Shar Rizvi, DPG for the State. 
>>>>>>>…<<<<<<<<
Irshad Ali Shah, J; It
is alleged that the applicant dishonselty issued a cheque in favour of
complainant Relo Mall, it was bounced by the concerned Bank, when it was
presented there for encashment, on being approach for return of his money, the
complainant was threatened of murder by the applicant, for that the present
case was registered.
2.         The applicant on having been refused
pre-arrest bail by learned Additional Sessions Judge-II/Gender Based Violence
Court, Sukkur, has sought for the same from this Court by way of instant bail
application under Section 498-A Cr.P.C.
3.         It is contended by learned counsel for
the applicant that applicants being innocent has been involved in this case
falsely by the complainant party in order to satisfy its dispute with him over
settlement of account, the cheque was issued as security and it has been
misused by the complainant and the very case on investigation was recommended
by the police to be cancelled under “C” class, therefore the applicant is
entitled to be admitted to pre-arrest bail, as he is apprehending his
unjustified arrest. 
4.        Learned DPG for the State has recorded no
objection to grant of pre arrest bail to applicant while learned counsel for
the complainant has recorded objection to grant of pre arrest bail to the
applicants by contending that he has deprived the complainant of his hard
earned money. In support of his contention, he has relied upon case of Ghulam Murtaza Vs. The State (2013 YLR 566).
5.         I have considered the above arguments
and perused the record.
6.        The FIR of the incident has been lodged
with the delay of more than one month; such delay could not be lost sight of.
The parties are said to be disputed over settlement of account. The offence is
not falling with prohibitory clause of section 497(II) Cr.P.C; the very case on
investigation was recommended by the police to be cancelled under “C” class.
The applicant has joined the trial and he has not misused the concession of
pre-arrest bail. In these circumstances, the applicant is found entitled to
grant of pre arrest bail on point of further inquiry and malafide. 
7.         The case law which is relied upon by
learned counsel for the complainant is on distinguishable facts and
circumstance. In that case, the FIR was not recommended by the police to be
cancelled under “C” class. 
8. In view of
above, interim pre-arrest bail already granted to the applicants is confirmed
on same terms and conditions.
9.        Instant Crl. Bail Application is
disposed of accordingly. 
 
   Judge
Nasim/Steno.
 
 



