







 
IN THE HIGH COURT OF
SINDH BENCH AT SUKUR
 
Cr.B.A.No.625 
of 2015
 
For Hearing      :       12.11.2015
 
Mr.
Shakeel Ahmed Kalwar Advocate for applicant.
Mr. 
Abdul Rehman Kolachi APG.
                     
                            ORDER
 
SHAHNAWAZ
TARIQ,J:- Throughcaptioned post arrest bail application, applicant
Bilawal Kamboh has impugned order dated 29.05.2015, passed by the Court of
learned Sessions Judge/Special Judge for CNS, Khairpur, whereby his earlier
bail application was dismissed.
 
2.     Necessary
facts spelt out form FIR are that on fateful day at about 12-noon, complainant
SIP Ghulam Ali Shar apprehended applicant atMari Naka Link Road, Mehrabpur and
recovered 2500 Grams Charas from his possession, hence instant FIR.
 
3.     Learned
counsel for applicant contended that applicant is innocent and has been falsely
implicated by complainant; that there is 16 days delay in sending the recovered
narcotic substance to the Chemical Examiner, which is fatal to the prosecution case;
that recovered narcotic was sent by SSP Khairpur and SHO Pir Wassan with separate
letters directly to the Chemical Examiner, Rohri, which created serious doubt
and personal interest of the police; that applicant is behind the bar for more
than 07 months without trial. He relied upon the case reported as 2012 SCMR 573,
Jamal-ud-din alias Zubair Khan v. The State, 2010 SCMR 1160, KhudaBux v. The
State and 2012 P.Cr.L.J 1901, Noshad v. The State.
4.     While
controverting the above submissions, learned APG contended that applicant was
apprehended at the spot and 2500 grams Charas was recovered from his
possession, which was sent forchemical examination and Chemical Examiner has opined
that recovered substance was Charas, hence applicant is not entitled for grant
of bail.
5.     I
have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the available record
minutely, which reflects that applicant was apprehended on 30.03.2015 at
12-noon at Mari Naka Link Road, Mehrabpur, which is a busy road but complainant
neither associated any private person to act as mashir nor he made serious
efforts in this regard, while availability of private persons at the busy place
of recovery could not be ruled out.It is well settled that private persons
should be given preference if they are available at the spot rather than
official personnel to maintain the transparency of the recovery. In the case of
State v. Bashir and others, PLD 1997 SC 408, the Hon’ble Supreme Court while
dealing with the issue of applicability of the provisions of section 103,
Cr.P.C, has observed as follows:-  
“As
regards the above second submission of Mr. M.M. Aqil, it may be observed that
it has been repeatedly held that the requirement of section 103, Cr.P.C.
namely, that two members of the public of the locality should be Mashirs to the
recovery, is mandatory unless it is shown by the prosecution that in the
circumstances of a particular case it was not possible to have two Mashirs from
the public. In this regard, it will suffice to refer to a recent Judgment of
this Court in the case of Mushtaq Ahmed v. The State, PLD 1996 SC 574. In the case
in hand SIP Muhammad Rafique has not been able to give any cogent explanation
as to why he was unable to secure two Mashirs from the public.”
6.     There
is no explanation for sendingthe recovered substance with the delay of 16 days
while Chemical Laboratory, Rohri is about 50 Kilometers away from police
station. Learned APG has no explanation that when SSP, Khairpur had sent the recovered
substance directly to Chemical Examiner, Rohri vide letter No.PB/J/-090,
Khairpur, dated 03.04.2015, then how SHO Police Station, Pir Wassan again sent
same narcotics for report to Chemical Examiner vide letter No.39116, dated
14.4.2015, which was received on same by the Chemical Examiner’s Office, while
case property was not available at police station. Learned APG candidly submitted
that as per practice in vogue, SSP never sends recovered substance to the Chemical
Examiner, as it is assignment of Investigating Officer to transmit the
recovered substance to the Chemical Examiner and collect such report.This
aspect of the case requires serious consideration. In the case of Noshad
(supra), bail was granted to accused on the ground that recovered substance was
sent to Chemical Examiner with delay of 07 days, while in the present case
recovered narcotic was sent with unexplained delay of 16 days and there is no
plausible explanation where said case property was kept which also requires
consideration.
 
7.     In
the case of Jamaluddin (supra), while dealing with the case of recovery of 04
Kilograms Charas, thehonourable Supreme Court observed as follows:-
“Without
entering into the merits of the case, as the quantum of sentence has to e
commensurate with the quantum of substance recovered, we doubt the petitioner
can be awarded maximum sentence provided by the Statute. Needless to say that
the Court while hearing, a petition for bail is not to keep in view the maximum
sentence provided by the Statue but the one which is likely to be entailed in
the facts and circumstances of the case.  The fact that petitioner has been in
jail for three months yet commencement of his trial let
alone its conclusion is not in sight, would also tilt the scales of justice in
favour of bail rather than jail”.
8.     After
completion of investigation, Challan has been submitted and accused is no more
required to the police and since the date of arrest, applicant is behind the
bar and prosecution has failed to examine a single witness within a period of
about 07 months though all the PWs are police officials and it was not a difficult
task for the prosecution to examine two witnesses against applicant before the
trial Court. Consequently, further detention of applicant will not serve  any
useful purpose and even no one can be detained for an indefinite period. There
is no apprehension of tempering with the prosecution evidence as all PWs are
police officials. As such applicant has succeeded to make out a case for
further enquiry as envisaged under Section 497(2), Cr.P.C, therefore he is
admitted to post-arrest bail subject to his furnishing a solvent surety in the
sum of Rs.100,000/- and P.R Bond in the like amount to the satisfaction of
learned trial Court.
9.     The
above observations are tentative in nature and shall not influence upon the
merits of the case.
 
 
                                                                        JUDGE
 
 
Akber.
 



