







                                                          
IN
THE HIGH COURT OF SINDH BENCH AT SUKKUR

Cr.
Bail Application No.S-149 of 2015
 
Date of hearing       :       14-01-2016.
 
 
M/s
Irshad Hussain Dharejo & Rahim Dino Mahessar advocates for applicant.
Mr.
Ghulamullah Memon advocate for complainant.
    
Mr. S. Sardar Ali Shah APG.
                                    
-------------
 
ORDER
 
SHAHNAWAZ
TARIQ,J:-      Through captioned post-arrest bail
application, applicantAnwar Ali has impugned order dated 01.12.2014,  whereby his
earlier bail application was declined by the Court of Additional Session Judge,
Moro.
 
2.       Relevant
facts narrated in FIR are that on 01.07.2014, complainant along with his brother
Habibullah left for their land by riding motorcycle and near Thul Canal,
accused Mumtaz armed with Kalashnikov, Haji Gullan with 222 rifle, Anwar alias
Anu with repeater, Hameed and Ashraf with pistols, along with two unknown armed
persons, intercepted them. Accused Haji Gullan Dahiri  and Mumtaz Dahiri made
fires from Kalashnikov and rifle 222, which hit Habibullah who succumbed to his
injury at the spot, hence instant FIR.
 
3.       Learned
Counsel for applicant contended that applicant is innocent and has been falsely
implicated by complainant in instant crime with ulterior motive as parties are
already disputed with each other; that complainant party is involved in series
of F.I.Rs viz. 22/2013, 111/2012, 86/2012 and 25/2013 lodged by them against
them; that co-accused Hameed and Ashraf have already been granted bail by
learned trial Court and case of present applicant is on same footing, hence he
is entitled for concession of bail under the rule of consistency; that injury
sustained by the deceased was caused by Kalashnikov and not by repeater; that
there are general allegations leveled against applicant which requires further
considerations.Learned Counsel relied upon the case of Rehmatullah v. Fazal Baqi
and another (1998 SCMR 455), Nisar Ahmed  v. The Stateand others (2014SCMR 27)Mohammad
Iqbal v. The State (2011 SCMR 1943), Shahid v. The State (1994 SCMR 393) and
Mohammad Haroon and another v. The State (1994 SCMR 2161).
 
4.       While
controverting the above submissions,learned Counsel for complainant vehemently
contended that name of applicant is mentioned in the F.I.R, while he was armed
with repeater and after his arrest, he himself produced repeater before Investigating
Officer; that empties of repeater recovered from the spot, were sent for
chemical examination and as per Ballistic Expert report, same were matched with
said repeater, hence he is not entitled for grant of bail. Learned Counsel
replied upon 2011 PSC (Crl.) 815.
 
5.       Learned
AAG considering the material as well medical report of deceased, extended no
objection for grant of bail.
 
6.       Heard
learned Counsel for the parties supported with case law and examined the
material available on record properly. 
 
7.       Perusal
of record reflects that parties are inimical with each other and factum of
animosity is reflected from the averments of F.I.R. There is delay of more than
12 hours in the lodgment of F.I.R, for which no plausible explanation has been
furnished in F.I.R. by the complainant. 
 
8.       In the case of Nisar Ahmed v. The State and others (2014
SCMR 27), the honourable Supreme Court has observed as follows:-
“Accused
and co-accused allegedly entered complainant's house, whereafter co-accused
shot at and killed complainant's daughter/deceased. Prima facie, accused was
not directly connected with the motive part of the prosecution story. Accused
was not alleged to have fired at the deceased or any prosecution witness at the
time of occurrence. Even the motorcycle on which the accused allegedly came at
the spot of occurrence did not belong to him, and according to investigating
officer it was owned by a co-accused. Question of accused's guilt required
further inquiry. Accused was released on bail accordingly.”
In the case of Muhammad v. The State and others (1998 SCMR 454),
the honourable Supreme Court has observed as follows:-
“Accused
had allegedly made an ineffective firing and no injury was attributed to him to
the deceased, during the occurrence. Case against accused, therefore, needed
further inquiry. Petitioner for leave to appeal was converted into appeal and
accused admitted to bail accordingly.”
In the case of Mohammad Iqbal and others v. The State (2011 SCMR
1943), the honourable Supreme Court has observed as follows:-
“Qatl-e-amd, criminal assault on woman,
trespassing, criminal intimidation, Ghayr-Jaifah Hashimah, Shajjah-i-Khafifah,
Shajjah-i-Mudihah, other hurts, attempt to qatl-e-amd and rioting, determination
of individual liability. Case was that of free fight entailing individual
liability and no injury was attributed to any accused. If no specific injury
was attributed to any of the accused persons then it was to be seen as to what
individual liability the accused could be saddled with. Investigation of the
case had already been finalized and Challan was submitted thus physical custody
of accused persons was not required for the purposes of investigation. Case
against accused persons called for further inquiry into their guilt within the
purview of S. 497(2) Cr.P.C. bail was allowed.”
In the
case of Shahid v. The State (1994 SCMR 393), the
honourable Supreme Court has observed as follows:- 
“Accused
was attributed the role of getting hold of deceased when his co‑accused
was inflicting dagger blows on him.Another accused who had allegedly given
kicks and fists blows to the deceased had been extended the concession of bail.
Contentions that the accused on the principle of consistency was also entitled
to bail and that it was yet to be determined whether the accused had
facilitated the commission of the offence to attract S. 34, P.P.C. making out a
case for further enquiry, had substance. ­Petition for leave to appeal was
converted into appeal and the same was allowed in' circumstances and the
accused was released on bail accordingly.”
In the case of Mohammad Haroon and another v. The State (1994 SCMR
2161), the honourable Supreme Court has observed as follows:- 
“One
accused was alleged to have raised a "Lalkara" and the other accused
had allegedly held the deceased alongwith co-­accused at the time of occurrence.
Accused were not alleged to have caused any injury to any of the deceased. Petitions
for leave to appeal were converted into appeals in circumstances and the same
were allowed releasing the accused or bail.”
 
9.       Bare
perusal of the impugned order emanates that learned trial Court had granted
bail to co-accused Hameed and Ashraf to whom no specific role was assigned,
while learned trial Court had differentiated the case of present applicant,
which apparently reflects that Court was seemed to be influenced by the
recovery of repeater from the possession of applicant, though mere recovery of
repeater could not defeat the right of applicant for bail while his case is at
par to the case of co-accused to whom bail had already granted by the learned
trial Court.Per allegations leveled by the complainant in F.I.R, accused Haji
Gullan Dahiri and Mumtaz Dahiri made straightway fires of Kalashnikov and
rifle-222 upon the deceased, and deceased received only single bullet injury.
Neither any pallet was recovered from the corpse during post-mortem nor
deceased sustained any pallet injury, and medical report issued by Medico-Legal
Officer also confirms such fact. There are general allegations against
remaining accused including present applicant and no specific injury was attributed to the applicant,
hence it would be seen as to what extent the individual liability applicant could
be saddled with, and question of guilt of applicant for common
intention is also yet to be determined by the trial Court after recording the
evidence of the witnesses at trial. Investigation of the case had already been finalized and
Challan was submitted, thus physical custody of accused persons is not required
for the purposes of investigation.
 
10.     Considering
the above circumstances and no objection extended by learned APG, applicant has
succeeded
to make out his case for grant of bail on the ground of further inquiry as
contemplated in section 497(2) Cr.P.C. as well as under the rule of consistency.
Consequently, applicant is admitted to post arrest bail subject
to his furnishing solvent surety in the sum of Rs.100,000/-(Rupees One lac) and
PR bond in the like amount to the satisfaction of trial Court. 
 
11.     The
observations made above are tentative in nature and learned trial Court shall
decide the case strictly on merits.
          Bail application
stands disposed of in the above terms. 
 
 
                                                    
JUDGE
Ihsa



