
















IN THE HIGH COURT OF SINDH, BENCH AT SUKKUR
Crl. Bail Application No.S-525 of 2021
 



Date of hearing 


               Order with signature of Judge



 
          1.
For Orders on office objection. 
2. For
hearing of bail application.
 
O R D E R.
27-01-2022.
 
                                      Mr.
Imtiaz Hussain Shahani, advocate for applicant.
                             Mr.
Manzoor Hussain Halepoto, advocate for complainant. 
Mr. Aftab Ahmed Shar, APG
for the State.
 
AMJAD ALI SAHITO J., Through instant Application applicants/accused Siraj
Ahmed Solangi seeks pre-arrest bail in Crime No. 48/2021, offence registered at
police Station Kumb, District Khairpur. Prior to this, his pre arrest bail
application was turned down by learned IInd Additional Sessions Judge Khairpur
vide order dated 12-08-2021, hence instant bail application.
2.       The
details and particulars of the FIR are already available in the bail
application and FIR, same could be gathered from the copy of FIR attached with
such application, hence, needs not to reproduce the same hereunder.
3.       Learned
counsel for applicant/accused contended that that applicant/accused is innocent
and has falsely been implicated in this case by the complainant with mala fide
intentions and ulterior motives; that there is inordinate delay of about 24
days in lodging the FIR and such delay has not been explained; that  injuries attributed to the applicant/accused
are on non-vital parts of body of injured, which requires evidence; that case
has been challaned and applicant is no more required for further investigation,
therefore, he pray for confirmation of interim pre-arrest bail.
4.       On the
other hand, learned DPG for the State assisted by learned counsel for the
complainant have vehemently opposed for the grant and confirmation of bail to
the applicant/accused on the ground that he is nominated in the FIR with
specific role of causing firearm injury to injured with intention to commit his
murder. 
5.       I have
heard learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the material
available on record.
6.       Perusal
of FIR reveals that delay in lodging the FIR has properly been explained by the
complainant in the FIR as after the incident injured was brought at police
station, where from the letter was obtained and injured was shifted to RHC
Kotdiji, wherefrom he was referred to Civil Hospital Khairpur and then referred
to GIMS Hospital Gambat for better treatment, hence the delay is properly
explained by the complainant. Perusal of FIR shows that PC
Saeed Ahmed had taken the mobile phone from Altaf Hussain nephew of the
complainant for some days, but on its demand, PC Saeed Ahmed was annoyed. On
28-02-2021 when complainant along with his brother Mir Muhammad and Nephew
Altaf Hussain were available at Tumrani Hotel Hussaini Shah situated near FFC
Godown Deh Arbab Machii village No.1, it ws about 0930 hours, when accused PC
Saeed Ahmed, PC Siraj Ahmed and PC Sharafuddin armed with TT pistols and fired
upon Altaf Hussain with intention to commit his murder, who sustained firearm
injuries, which shows that applicant/accused along with co-accused are nominated in the FIR with
specific role, as they duly armed with deadly weapons fired with their
respective weapons upon injured Altaf Hussain with intention to commit his
murder. During
investigation, the investigating officer has recorded the 161 Cr.P.C statements
of PWs, who have fully supported the version of the complainant. Moreover,
learned APG for the State pointed that after registration of FIR,
applicant/accused Siraj Ahmed Solangi is placed under suspension and co-accused
Saeed Ahmed Solangi is dismissed from the service by Senior Superintendent of
Police Khairpur and in this regard an enquiry has been assigned to DSP/SDPO
Kotdiji. The ocular evidence finds support from the medical evidence. Sufficient
material is available on record to connect the applicant/accused with the
commission of offence. At bail stage only tentative assessment is to be considered
and deeper appreciation of evidence is not warranted by law. Nothing has been
brought on the record to shown any ill-will or malafide on the part of the
complainant or IO of the case, which is basic requirement for grant of
pre-arrest bail. In this regard, I am fortified with the case law of Hon'ble
Supreme Court of Pakistan [2019 SCMR 1129] wherein the Hon'ble Supreme Court of
Pakistan has held as under:-
          ''Grant of pre-arrest bail is an
extra ordinary remedy in criminal jurisdiction; it is diversion of usual course
of law, arrest in cognizable cases; a protection to the innocent being hounded
on trump up charges through abuse of process of law, therefore a petitioner
seeking judicial protection is required to reasonably demonstrate that intended
arrest is calculated to humiliate him with taints of mala fide; it is not a
substitute for post arrest bail in every run of the mill  criminal case as it seriously hampers the
course of investigation----the principles of judicial protection are being
faithfully adhered to till date, therefore, grant of pre-arrest bail
essentially requires considerations of malafide, ulterior motive or abuse of
process of law."
7.
      It seems that the applicant/accused is
involved in the commission of offence by causing injuries to the nephew complainant
with intention to commit his murder, who has sustained five firearm injuries at
the hands of applicant/accused and co-accused, therefore his case scarily flaws
within the prohibitory clause of section 497 Cr.P.C.  
8.
      In view of above discussion, learned
counsel for the applicant/accused has failed to make out a good case for grant of
pre arrest bail in the light of sub section (2) of Section 497 CrPC, therefore,
the applicant/accused is not entitled for any concession, hence his pre arrest
bail application is rejected
and interim bail already granted to them vide order dated 26-08-2021 is hereby
recalled. 
9.
      Needless, to mention that the
observations made herein above are tentative in nature
and would not prejudice the case of either party at trial. Office is direction
to place a signed copy of this Order in captioned connected matter.                               
 
J U D G E
 
Nasim/P.A               



