






ORDER SHEET






CRL.
BAIL APPLICATION NO.824/2011
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Date                      Order
with signature of Judge
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
For hearing. 
 
16.08.2011
 
Mr. Asadullah
Baloch advocate for applicants. 
Mr. Zahoor
Shah, APG
……………
 
                    The applicants Munir Ahmed
and Muhammad Ansar have approached this Court for grant of post-arrest bail,
after their similar request was declined by learned 1st Additional
Sessions Judge, Malir-Karachi, vide order dated 10.05.2011 passed in connection
with Crime/FIR No.171/2011 of PS Sohrab Goth, under section 365/34 PPC. 
                    As per the FIR lodged by
complainant Mst. Kundan wife of Ghulam Shabbir on 12.03.2011 at 5.10 p.m,
incident took place on the same day at 9.00 a.m. in which the accused persons
including the present two applicants, abducted the daughter and maternal grand daughter
aged about 3 years, of the complainant Mst. Kundan and took away them in a High
Roof vehicle. 
                    The learned counsel for the
applicants contends that no offence under section 365 PPC is made out and the
same at the most offence, would fall under section 342 PPC as there is a simple
allegation of abduction and no serious type of allegation relating to zina etc
has been leveled against the applicants in the FIR. He relying upon the case
reported as 1969 SCMR 491, PLJ 1983 FSC 157, PLJ 1984 FSC 84, AIR 1938 Lahore
474 and AIR 1939 Lahore 26, contended that in similar type of cases the bail is
being granted to the accused persons and accordingly the present applicants are
also entitled for the concession of bail, specially when there is delay in
lodging FIR in which no motive of crime is shown and that the applicants have
falsely been implicated in this case due to previous dispute and enmity. 
                    On the other hand, the
learned A.P.G. appearing for the State vehemently opposed the above contentions,
submitting that the applicants are not entitled for the concession of bail as
they not only committed forcible abduction but they also illegally detained the
abductrees upto 04.04.2011. 
                    I have considered the
contentions of the parties. The perusal of record shows that the learned trial
Court dismissed the bail application of the applicants vide order dated
10.05.2011, the last and relevant paragraphs of which, are as under :-
          “After
hearing the arguments, I have perused the record and find that the accused/applicants
are nominated in the FIR with specific role. The FIR was lodged by the
complainant on the same day. The complainant in her FIR and victim in her 164
Cr.P.C. statement have implicated the applicants/accused, so also other PWs in
their 161 Cr.P.C. statements. The bail before arrest application of co-accused
namely Muhammad Ramzan and Muhammad Safdar have already been rejected by this
Court, vide order dated 22.04.2011. The learned counsel for the
applicants/accused has argued that the alleged offence does not fall within the
prohibitory clause of section 497 Cr.P.C. It is pertinent to mention here that
the nature of present case is heinous one, and Hon’ble Supreme Court declined
the offence not falling the prohibitory clause of section 497 Cr.P.C, while
noticing gravity of the offence.
          The
cumulative effect of my above discussion is that the police has prima facie
collected the sufficient material to connect the present accused in the
commission of the crime, hence they are not entitled to bail, therefore, their
bail application is dismissed.”
 
                    Apart from above, the 164
Cr.P.C. statement of the alleged abductee Mst. Parveen recorded by the Judicial
Magistrate, Malir, Karachi, on 06.04.2011 reveals that the accused persons
after abducting her and her minor daughter, and after traveling for about 2/3
hours in their vehicle, took the abductees to an unknown place where they
confined them and harassed the abductee Mst. Parveen and also threatened her of
committing her murder. It further appears from such 164 Cr.P.C. statement of
Mst. Parveen that it was also alleged by accused persons that her mother Mst. Kundan
had got their two men, arrested through the police.  
                    In the circumstances, the
present case does not appear to be fit one for the concession of bail at this
stage and therefore the present bail application of the applicants is hereby
dismissed. However, the trial Court is directed to record the evidence of the
complainant and alleged abductees within a period of 02 months of receipt of
the copy of this order and then the applicants shall be at liberty to move bail
application afresh to be decided by the trial Court on merits. 
 
                                                                                      J U D G E 
 
Imran/PA
 
 
 



