



IN THE HIGH COURT OF SINDH AT KARACHI




IN THE
HIGH COURT OF SINDH, KARACHI
 
Criminal
Appeal No. 211 of 2004
 
                Present:    
                                Mr.
Justice Nadeem Azhar Siddiqi 
 
 
 



Date
  of Hearing


:
 


24.03.2009
 




Appellant
 
 


:
 
 


Abdul Rahim through Mr. Anwar Ali Shah, Advocate.
 




Respondent
 
 


:
 
 


THE STATE through Syed Ahmed Ali Shah, Standing Counsel.
 



 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
NADEEM AZHAR SIDDIQI, J :
 The present
appeal is directed against the Judgment dated 29.4.2004 passed by the Learned Ist
Additional Sessions Judge, Karachi West, by which the Learned Judge convicted
the appellant for offence punishable under Sections 420, 468, 471 and 474,
P.P.C., sentenced him to suffer R.I. for five years and fine of Rs.5,000/- or
in default thereof, to suffer R.I. for 1/4th of his sentence under the impugned
judgment.      
The allegation against the appellant is that he arrived from Saudi Arabia by Ship Al-Madina on 28.03.1997. On being suspicion that he is non Pakistani
national and referred to the FIA, Examination Cell for further legal action. It
was further alleged that the appellant is non Pakistani national and has
obtained Pakistani passport and national identity card with the active
connivance of the officials/officers of Passport Office Karachi and National
Registration Office Karachi.
The police after usual investigation challaned the appellant
in Court and the learned trial Court has framed the charge on 06.07.1998, to
which the appellant pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried. 
At the trial the prosecution has examined Inspector Abdul
Nabi Abbasi as PW-1 vide Exh.4 and Inspector Zafar Iqbal as PW-2 vide Ex.5.
Thereafter, the prosecution has closed its side. 
After closing the side on behalf of the prosecution, the
statement under Section 342, Cr.P.C. of the appellant was recorded by the trial
Court. The appellant has examined himself on oath under Section 340(2), Cr.P.C.

The PW-1, Abdul Nabi Abbasi, in his deposition has said
nothing about the forgery of documents. The witness stated that from their
documents the appellant was not Pakistani and on suspicion he stopped him for
further proceedings.
The PW-2, Zafar Iqbal, in his deposition has not stated
anything about the nationality of the appellant and has also not stated that
the passport and national identity card are forged and fabricated documents.
The appellant has not cross-examined the witness.
Perusal of the record it transpires that the documents i.e.
passport and national identity card of the appellant produced by the PW-1 were not
questioned. There is no allegation that these are forged and fabricated
documents. In presence of the above said documents and in absence of any
evidence to the contrary the suspicion that the appellant is a non Pakistani national
has no basis.
The sections applied in this matter are related to forgery of
documents. For conviction under Section 468, PPC the prosecution has to
establish and prove that the appellant has forged documents. Section 471, PPC
applies to a person, who forged documents as genuine. Perusal of Sections 468
and 471, PPC shows that these sections can only be applied, if it is proved
that a false document has been prepared. Section 474, PPC can only be applied,
if it is shown that documents are forged, accused know that the documents are
forged, the accused is in possession of forged documents, the accused intended
that the documents would be fraudulently or dishonestly used as genuine and
that the documents are of the description mentioned in Sections 466 and 467,
PPC.
From the perusal of evidence it also transpires that the
prosecution has failed to prove that the national identity card and passport
are forged documents. The malafides of the prosecution are also evident from
the fact that inspite of allegation that the appellant is a non Pakistani
national and had obtained Pakistani passport and Pak NI card with the active
connivance of the officials of Regional Passport Office and National
Registration Office no inquiry has been conducted into the issuance of national
identity card and Pakistanis passport to the appellant and the officers
responsible for issuance of documents were not involved.
It is also pertinent to mention here that in his statement
recorded under Section 342, Cr.P.C. no question was put up to the appellant
that he possessed forged national identity card and passport. The piece of
evidence not put up to the appellant cannot be used to convict him. The
appellant in his statement on oath recorded under Section 340(2), Cr.P.C. has
stated that he had gone to Saudi Arabia for performing Umrah by air and he was
apprehended and sent to Pakistan. This piece of evidence has not been
controverted in cross-examination.
Learned trial Court without any cogent evidence available on
record has come to the conclusion that the appellant was involved in the
offence. Learned trial Court has also wrongly shifted the burden upon the appellant
to prove that he is Pakistani national. Since the appellant is in possession of
NIC and passport it is the duty of the prosecution to first prove that the appellant
is a non Pakistan national and possessed forged and fabricated passport and
national identity card and, thereafter, the burden can be shifted upon the appellant.
In the light of what has been discussed above, the
prosecution has failed to prove its case against the appellant beyond any
reasonable doubt, therefore, the appellant is entitled to the benefit of doubt,
which is accordingly given to him. Consequently, the conviction and sentence
awarded to the appellant under the impugned judgment are set aside. The
appellant is present on bail, his bail bond stands cancelled and surety
discharged.
The appeal was allowed by short order dated 24.3.2009 and
these are the reasons of the same. 
 
 
Karachi, 24th March,
2009.                       JUDGE
 
 
 
 



