



ORDER SHEET




 
ORDER SHEET
IN THE HIGH COURT
OF SINDH, CIRCUIT COURT LARKANA
Cr.B.A.No.S-206 of
2023
(Khadim Hussain Vs.
The State)
 

DATE                           ORDER WITH
SIGNATURE OF JUDGE

 
 
For hearing of bail
application.
 
01.06.2023.
 
 
Mr. Shahbaz Ali Brohi, Advocate for the
applicant. 
Mr. Abdul Rehman
Bhutto, Advocate for complainant.
Mr. Shafi Muhammad
Mahar, D.P.G for the State.
                                              
  -.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-
IRSHAD
ALI SHAH J;- It is alleged that the
applicant with rest of the culprits, in furtherance of their common intention
besides committing murder of Zahid Ahmed, caused fire shot injuries to PWs
Muhammad Azeem and Mst.Dhayani with intention to commit their murder and then
went away by causing lathi blow to PW Abdul Qayoom and making aerial firing to
create harassment and insulting complainant party, for that the present case
was registered. On refusal of post-arrest bail by learned 3rd Additional
Sessions Judge, Shikarpur, the applicant has sought for the same from this
Court by way of instant application u/s. 497 Cr.PC.
2.        It
is contended by learned counsel for the applicant that the name of the
applicant does not transpire in the FIR and no effective role in commission of
the incident is attributed to him, therefore, he is entitled to be released on bail
on point of further inquiry, which is not opposed by learned D.P.G for the
State. However, learned counsel for the complainant has opposed to release of
applicant on bail by contending that his name was disclosed by the complainant
subsequently by making further statement and he is vicariously liable for
commission of the incident.   
3.        Heard
arguments and perused the record.
4.        The
name and description of the applicant are not appearing in FIR though it has
been lodged with delay of about one day; it was disclosed subsequently by the
complainant by making further statement, which was made with delay of about ten
days to FIR; the further statement made by the complainant could hardly be
treated as part of FIR; even otherwise,  no effective role in commission of the
incident is attributed to the applicant, therefore, vicarious liability on his
part, if any, would call for determination at trial; the case has finally been
challaned and there is no apprehension of tampering with the evidence on the
part of applicant. In these circumstances, a case for release of applicant on
bail on point of further inquiry is made out.
5.        In
view of above, the applicant is admitted to bail subject to his furnishing
surety in sum of Rs.200,000/- and P.R bond in the like amount to the
satisfaction of learned trial Court.  
6.        The
instant bail application is disposed of accordingly.
                                                                                                  
   JUDGE
 



