







ORDER SHEET











ORDER SHEET
IN THE HIGH COURT
OF SINDH, BENCH AT SUKKUR
 
Cr. B.A. No. S- 420 of  2012.
 
 
For hearing. 
 
 
Mr. Rana Hafiz Tanveer Ahmed Advocate for the Applicant.
Mr. Sardar Ali Shah, APG for the State.
 
                        Date
of hearing:         07.08.2012.
 
                                                *****
Naimatullah Phulpoto J.,
The applicant/accused Shuaib seeks bail in Crime No. 60 of 2012, lodged against
accused at Police Station, Bhiria City on 20.4.2012, under sections 302, 364, 311,
120-B, 34 PPC.
            Brief facts of the
prosecution case as disclosed in the FIR are that complainant had three
brothers. Qurban Ali aged about 22 years (now deceased) was his younger
brother. About five years back, complainant shifted from village Kharr Taluka
Daulatpur and settled in village Usman. Deceased Qurban Ali was Munshi with his
uncle Haji Aslam Bughio at Shahpur Jahania. About two months back, Qurban Ali
entered into love marriage with Mst. Samina d/o Ghulam Rasol resident of Gujranwala province Punjab,
presently residing at Daulatpur. It is alleged that one Safdar, brother of Mst.
Samina was annoyed with Qurban Ali. Safdar Ali Mst. Rubina sister of Samina had
declared Qurban Ali as KARO. Thereafter, Qurban Ali along with his wife Mst.
Samina came to complainant and started living with him. On the day of incident,
Mst. Rubina talked to Qurban and Mst. Samina on mobile phone and stated that she
has settled family dispute about love marriage. Mst. Rubina called Qurban and
his wife Samina at link road at banana garden for collection of gifts. It is further
stated that Qurban Ali replied Mst. Rubina that they should come to his
village. Any how, complainant along with his brother Qurban Ali, Miskeen, P.W.
Mohammad Ramzan and sister-in-law Mst. Samina got a rickshaw and proceeded to
banana garden of Ashraf Rajput where they reached at 1 p.m. At 1:30 p.m. one Cultus car appeared on the road.
Accused got down from vehicle. Car was being driven by one Moazam Jatt. It is
alleged that accused Safdar, Niaz Ali and Moazam and one unidentified accused
carrying pistols in their hands issued challenges and asked Qurban Ali as to
why he has married to Mst. Samina without their consent and declared him as KARO.
It is alleged that accused Safdar Ali and Niaz fired from pistols which hit to Qurban
Ali and he fell down. Complainant party could not resist. Thereafter, it is
alleged that Mst. Rubina dragged Mst. Samina and made her to sit in a car and declared
Mst. Samina as Kari and drove away. Complainant took his brother Qurban in
injured condition to Bhiria hospital and then shifted to Civil Hospital,
Naushehro Feroze where he succumbed to the injuries.
 Statements of PWs
Miskeen and Mohammad Ramzan were recorded under section 161 Cr.P.C on 25.4.2012
and present applicant was arrested on 26.4.2012. Abductee Mst. Samina was
recovered on 26.4.2012. Her 161 Cr.P.C. statement was recorded on 27.4.2012. Statement
of Mst. Samina was recorded under section 164 Cr.P.C. on 5.5.2012. Accused Mst.
Rubina was let off by police during investigation. On the conclusion of
investigation, challan was submitted against the present applicant and others
under sections 302,364,343,120-B PPC.
Bail application was moved on behalf of the applicant
before learned Additional Sessions Judge, Naushehro Feroze, which was rejected
vide order dated 21.5.2012.
            Learned counsel for the
applicant contended that name of the present applicant did not transpire in the
FIR. The applicant has also not been implicated by the PWs in their 161 CrPC
statements. Only allegation against the applicant is that he was taxi driver
and he had facilitated co-accused in the abduction of Mst. Samina. Accused
Rubina has been let off by police during investigation. It was further argued
that prosecution case is highly doubtful and the applicant has no concern of
whatsoever with the alleged offence. In support of his contentions, learned counsel
has relied upon the case law reported as Syed Amanullah Shah v. The State (PLD
1996 SC 241) and Muhammad Shaheen alias Shan v. The State (2009 PCrLJ 21).         
            Learned
APG for the State argued that the applicant was taxi driver and he had
facilitated co-accused in the commission of offence. PW Mst. Samina has implicated
the applicant in her abduction, as such he has opposed this bail application.
            I have carefully heard learned
counsel for the parties and perused the record. 
Name of the applicant did not transpire in the FIR so
also in 161 Cr.P.C statements of PWs. P.W Mst. Samina in her statement under
section 164 Cr.P.C has stated that she along with her sister Mst. Rubina after
murder of Qurban Ali were taken forcibly by accused persons in a car to Punjab
and she has implicated accused Roshan, present applicant and Moazam. It is very
strange that Mst. Samina did not raise hue and cry on the way to the Punjab even at petrol pumps. Furthermore, 164 Cr.P.C of P.W
Mst. Samina was recorded with unexplained delay on 5.5.2012 which also creates
doubt in the prosecution case. Accused Mst. Rubina was let off by police during
investigation. There is no allegation against the applicant about his
involvement in murder of Qurban Ali. There is no motive against
applicant/accused for commission of offence. Involvement of the applicant in
second episode at subsequent stage can only be determined by the trial court
after recording of evidence. Moreover, no over act is attributed against the
applicant/accused. Prima facie, case against applicant/accused appears to be
doubtful. Benefit of doubt shall go to the applicant even at bail stage.
Learned counsel for the applicant in support of his contentions has rightly
relied upon case reported as Syed Amanullah (supra) in which Hon’ble Supreme
Court held as under:
“So whenever
reasonable doubt arises with regard to the participation of an accused person
in the crime or about the truth/probability of the prosecution case and the
evidence proposed to be produced in support of the charge, the accused should
not be deprived of benefit of bail. In such a situation, it would be better to
keep an accused person on bail then in the jail, during the trial. Freedom of
an individual is a precious right. Personal liberty granted by a Court of
competent jurisdiction should not be snatched away from accused unless it
becomes necessary to deprive him of his liberty under the law. Where story of
prosecution does not appear to be probable, bail may be granted so that further
inquiry may be made into guilt of the accused”.
I, therefore, for the stated reasons hold that reasonable
doubt arises with regard to participation of present applicant/accused in this
case. Hence, case of the applicant prima facie calls for further inquiry in
terms of subsection 2 of section 497 Cr.P.C. Consequently, bail application is
allowed and bail is granted to the applicant Shuaib subject to his furnishing
solvent surety in the sum of Rs. 200,000/- (Rupees two lacs) with PR bond in
the like amount to the satisfaction of the trial court.    
The observations made are tentative in nature and trial Court
shall not be influenced by any such observation while deciding the case on
merits.
                                                                                                         Judge,



