



ORDER SHEET




                                                  

IN THE HIGH COURT OF SINDH AT KARACHI
 
                       
  Cr. Bail Application No.1002 of 2012
 



Date


Order with signature of Judge



 
1.For
orders on office objection and reply of Advocate at flag ‘A’
2.For
Hearing.
 
Date
of hearing    : 24.10.2012
Date
of order       : 24.10.2012
 
 
         
Mr. Muhammad Irfan, advocate for the applicants 
Mr.
Irfan Hasan, advocate for the complainant
Mr.
Muhammad Iqbal Awan, APG
Applicants
Malik Muhammad Hayat and Hakim Ali are produced in custody from jail
                                   
-----------
 
 
O R D E R
 
Aqeel
Ahmed Abbasi, J:  Being
aggrieved and dis-satisfied with the order dated 25.09.2012 passed by the
learned 1st Additional Sessions Judge, Karachi West in Bail
Application No.1171 of 2012 in Crime No.434/2012 under section 392/427/34 PPC
registered at P.S. Surjani Town, whereby bail of the applicants was rejected,
the applicants approached before this court under section 497 Cr.P.C seeking
their release on bail subject to furnishing surety.
2.       Brief
facts of the prosecution case are that complainant lodged the report on
16.9.2012 at 1620 hours, in which he stated that he is doing his personal
business of “BHOSI TUKRAY” on his Suzuki No. CC-2664. On 15.9.2012 at
2230 hours (night), where he was going back to his home from Bhens Colony and
reached at Marbal Factory turning, then 4 persons came there on motorcycles
number not known and stopped him, he know them as (1) Malik Hayat (2) Waqas (3)
Hakim Gujjar and (4) Anwar Magsi. They snatched his Rs.33,300/- cash, one Nokia
Mobile phone No.0312-8366271 and one Wrest Watch Seiko from him on gun point
they also damaged the glasses and body of above number Suzuki and fled away. 
          
3.       Notices
were issued to learned APG as well as complainant, pursuant to which Mr. Irfan
Hassan, advocate has shown his appearance on behalf of the complainant.
4.       Learned
counsel for the applicants argued that the applicants are innocent and have
been falsely implicated in the instant crime at the behest of complainant, with
whom there is previous enmity. It is further stated that neither the applicants
were arrest from the spot nor after their arrest any recovery whatsoever has
been effected from them. Per learned counsel, neither alleged robbed articles nor
the weapon which was allegedly used in the offence has been recovered inspite
of their arrest. Per learned counsel, the applicants are of advanced age who
are respectable citizens of the area, who are running their Cattle Farm for the
last many years. Several complaints have been filed by the applicants against some
unscrupulous persons for the theft of their buffelows for collection of Bhatta,
particularly against one Sultan Burfat and Hafiz Ahmed, whereas complainant of
the instant FIR is related to them. Learned counsel has referred to various applications
addressed to the concerned SHO and also to FIR No.380/12, which was got
registered by applicant Malik Muhammad Hayat against the above named accused
persons to show the previous enmity. It has been further stated that infact the
prosecution submitted final report for disposal of the case in “A” class,
wherein I.O. observed that the case has been registered in view of the previous
enmity, as the cases are registered against both the parties, whereas witnesses
have not supported the case of the complainant. Per learned counsel, case is of
further inquiry, therefore, applicants may be released on bail. In support of
his contention, learned counsel has placed reliance on the following judgments:
1.       Syed Arshad Ali Shah Bukhari v.
The State 2011 SCMR  1644.
 
2.       Ali Ahmed v. The State
2007 YLR 1144
3.       Muhammad Anis v. The
State PLD 2008 Karachi 1
 
5.       Conversely,
learned counsel for the complainant has opposed the grant of bail to the
applicants and has stated that the applicants have been nominated in the FIR
with specific role, whereas no direct previous enmity with the complainant is
established on the record. Per learned counsel, the applicants are not entitled
to be released on bail.
6.       Learned
AP.G, after perusal of record has supported the case of the applicants and
submitted that in view of final report submitted by the prosecution for
disposal of the case in “A” class, and no recovery of the alleged robbed
articles or weapons from the possession of the applicants the case of the
complainant has become doubtful. It is further stated that neither any alleged
empties have been recovered from the place of incident nor Suzuki Car, which
was allegedly broken in the alleged incident has been cited as case property. 
 
7.       I
have heard the learned counsel for the applicants, complainant as well as
learned APG and perused the record of the case. On tentative assessment of the
record and keeping in view the final report submitted by the prosecution for
disposal of the case in “A” class, and no recovery either of the alleged robbed
articles or weapons from the applicants, the case of the prosecution cannot be
treated as free from doubt. I am of the view that the case of the prosecution
requires further inquiry, whereas the ratio of the case laws relied upon the by
the learned counsel for the applicants are attracted in the instant case.
8.       Accordingly,
applicants namely, Malik Muhammad Hayat son of Bahadur Khan and Hakim Ali son
of Haji Muhammad Ismail are
admitted to bail subject to furnishing surety in the sum of Rs.1,00,000/-
(Rupees One Lac) each and P.R. Bond in the like amount to the satisfaction of
Nazir of this Court.
 
9.       Needless to observe
that the observations made hereinabove are tentative in nature and the learned
trial court shall not be prejudiced by any such observations and shall decide
the case on merits in view of the evidence available on record.
 
                JUDGE 
  



