



ORDER SHEET




ORDER
SHEET 
IN THE HIGH
COURT OF SINDH, BENCH AT SUKKUR
       
Cr. Bail No.348 of 2011 
  
Date                            Order with signature of Judge
 
 
Date
of hearing     :         13.10.2011.
 
Applicant             :         Kashif
Raza
 
Respondent           :         The
State
 
 
Mr.
Qurban Ali Malano, Advocate for the Applicant.
 
Mr.
Zulfiqar Ali Jatoi, DPG
 
M/s
Hadi Bux Bhatt and Waheed Ali Samtio, Advocates for the complainant.
 
 
Muhammad Ali Mazhar, J.:-           This application for bail
before arrest has been moved by the applicant in Crime No.42/2011, registered
at police station Gambat under sections 365-B, 506/2, 342, 34 PPC.
 
2. The complainant Ms. Saba Ambareen
lodged the FIR as under:- 
 
“The
complainant has filed Cr.No.236/2010 on 08.10.2010 against the accused Mazhar
Channo, who is in Central Prison, Khairpur. On 03.02.2011 at about 12:30 p.m.
the complainant was going to meet her maternal relatives, when accused Gada
Hussain Channo and Ashique Hussain Memon kidnapped her on the force of weapons
and took her to Central Prison Khaipur in the meantime accused Kashif Hussain
Memon got off from the car in the way and when reached at the jail, accused
Gada Hussain Channo stood at the gate of the jail and shown her pistol and called
upon her to meet with Mazhar Cahnno and given her a police official to take her
to Mazhar Cahnno and also issued threats  of murder. The complainant being
scared went inside the jail where they took her signature on the register and she
met with Mazhar Channo, who offered for compromise and marriage, so also to
withdraw the case and threatened the complainant that on failure to do so, her
brothers and parents will be murdered and they took the complainant to a place
of Sarkar Shah and threatened that if the complainant will not make statement
before court of law against her parents, she will be murdered and they kept the
complainant there for whole night, the complainant was reminded by a police
person that if the judge will inquire about anything, the complainant will say
that she  was in police station whole night. In fact, the police has taken her
from the place of Sarkar Shah who compelled her to make statement against her
parents before the court. When the complainant reached the court premises, same
persons armed with weapons were standing outside the court and the complainant
feeling danger to her life as well as of her parents gave her statement. When
she was in Darul Aman her brother Manzoor Hussain used to meet her who
satisfied the complainant that such accused persons cannot cause loss to them,
then on 14.02.2011,  she gave statement before the court and along with her
brother Manzoor Hussain went to her parents house and then she disclosed
aforesaid facts before her parents and brothers Manzoor Hussain and Ashfaque
Hussain and then immediately went to the learned Sessions Judge, Kahirpur and obtained
order for lodging FIR”.
 
 
3. The learned counsel for the applicant argued that the
applicant has been falsely implicated in this case. In her statement published
in daily Kawish dated 15.2.2011, the complainant has not implicated the present
applicant, but later on, she had given name of present applicant in the false
FIR. Learned counsel further stated that in her statement published on 15.2.2011,
the complainant stated that she was abducted by Gada Hussain and Ashiq and the
incident stated to have been occurred on 3.2.2011. Learned counsel further
argued that there is at least 15 days delay in lodging of FIR. The allegations
against the present applicant are general in nature, hence, the case of
applicant requires further inquiry. The learned counsel further argued that
co-accused Gada Hussain has been granted bail by the Additional Sessions Judge,
Gambat in the same crime number on 8.6.2011, while the interim bail granted to
the present applicant was recalled vide order dated 9.3.2011.
 
4. The learned counsel for the
complainant argued that on 14.2.2011 statement of the complainant under section
164 Cr.P.C. was recorded by the Civil Judge/Judicial Magistrate-II, Gambat in
which she has clearly stated that she was abducted by the accused persons
including the present applicant, therefore, the applicant is not entitled to be
released on bail. It is clear from the prosecution case that he has committed
the offence under section 365-B, 506/2, 342 & 34 PPC.
 
5. The learned A.P.G. has also opposed the bail application
and argued that since the applicant has been nominated in the FIR with specific
role, therefore, he is not entitled for the concession of bail.  He further
argued that prima facie the applicant is involved in the case of abduction of the
complainant and the trial court has rightly rejected his bail application.
 
6. It is an admitted fact that the offence allegedly
committed on 3.2.2011 and the FIR was registered on 19-2-2011 per direction of 
Justice of Peace. In fact, this is a case of two statements recorded under Section
164 Cr.P.C. The first statement of the complainant was recorded on 4.2.2011 by
the Civil Judge/Judicial Magistrate-II Gambat  in which the complainant
Mst.Saba Ambreen clearly stated that she was not abducted by anyone and she
also requested the court to remand her Darul Aman. This statement was recorded
in the same crime number. On 14.2.2011, before the court another statement was
recorded in which the names of applicant and co-accused Gada Hussain were
implicated by the complainant and stated that these persons have abducted her
on 3.2.2011. So at present there are two statements of the same complainant
recorded under section 164 Cr.P.C. and at this stage, it cannot be said which
of the statement was recorded under force and compulsion, therefore, the case
of present applicant requires further enquiry. 
 
7. In the FIR, complainant has stated that accused Gada
Hussain and Ashiq Husain kidnapped her on force of weapons and took her to Central
Prison, Khairpur.  Meantime,  Kashif  dropped  from the car in the way and when
they reached at Jail, accused Gada Hussain stood at the gate of Jail and shown pistol
to the complainant and given her a police person to take her to Mazhar  Channo.
The complainant being scared went inside the Jail where her signature was taken
on the register and she met with Mazhar Channo, who offered for compromise. It
is astonishing to note that the complainant never made any complaint to the
jail authorities regarding any threat of dire consequences when she allegedly went
to meet Mazhar Channo. 
 
8. Keeping in view  the facts and circumstances, I am of the
tentative view that the possibility of false involvement of the present
applicant cannot be ruled out, particularly in the circumstances, where two
statements of the same complainant  recorded under section 164 Cr.P.C. are
available on record, one is in the favour of the accused persons and second
statement is against them.  So it is to be determined during trial which
statement was recorded according to wishes of the complainant and which
statement was recorded by force and compulsion. It is also a fact that in the
same FIR, co-accused Gada Hussain against whom the allegation is more or less
same has been granted bail in the same crime. A basic concept of bail is that
no innocent person’s liberty is to be curtailed, until and unless proved
otherwise. Pre-arrest bail can be extended to a person who does not prima facie
appear to have committed for non-bailable offence or there is room for further
probe into his guilt  within the meaning of  section 497(2) Cr.P.C. From the
material placed before the court, if it tentatively appears to be a case with
reasonable doubt, then in such a  matter a court may extend the concession of a
pre-arrest bail to the accused.
 
9. The FIR has been lodged under section 365-B, 506/2, 342
and 34 PPC. So far as section 342 is concerned, it pertains to punishment for
wrongful confinement, which is bailable offence, while section 506/2 is a matter
of further inquiry, whether any threat was issued to cause death or grievous
hurt. While Section 365-B PPC pertains to kidnapping, abducting or inducing  woman
to compel for marriage etc., but again there is no allegation that the
complainant was forced or seduced to illicit intercourse. So far as the
allegation of kidnapping is concerned, the first statement recorded under
section 164 Cr.P.C favors the accused and whether it was recorded by force or
with consent of the complainant, this can only be proved or thrashed out during
trial but at this stage it is a case of further inquiry and there are no
reasonable grounds to believe that the applicant has committed any non-bailable
offence.
 
10. The applicant was granted
pre-arrest interim bail by this Court  on 18.4.2011 subject to furnishing
solvent surety in the sum of Rs.200,000/- and P.R. bond in the like amount,
which is hereby confirmed on the same terms and condition. The observations
made in this order are tentative in nature and will not prejudice the case of
either party.
 
Sukkur                                                                                     Judge
Dated. 21.11.2011                                                                            

 
 



