







 
ORDER SHEET
IN THE HIGH COURT OF SINDH, BENCH AT SUKKUR
 
 
CRL.BAIL.APPLICATION NO. S.334 of 2011.
 
Date of hearing:  15.08.2011
 
Applicant
  :         Nazir Ahmed Ghanghro through                                                       Mr.Sardar
Akbar F. Ujjan Advocate                                                          
Respondent:         State through Mr.
Syed Sardar Ali Shah, Assistant Prosecutor General.
 
 
Muhammad Ali Mazhar -J., The applicant has brought this bail
application under Section 497 CR.PC in Crime No.307 of 2008, lodged under
Section 302 P.P.C at Police Station, Kandiaro, District Naushahro-Feroze.
 
2. Succinctly, the facts of the
case are that the complainant Abdul Hakim Ghanghro lodged the F.I.R on
04.12.2008, gist of which is reproduced as under:-
 
“It
is complained that Arbelo s/o Punhal Ghanghro aged about 30 years is my step
son. He lives separately from me in his house with his brothers Nawab and
Qurban. Nawab is doing business of cattle. Two days back he had taken Uzha
cattle to Karachi for sale. Today in the night it was our turn of water
rotation. I and my step son Qurban were attending the water rotation. We both
had gone together. While the water was flowing, I and Qurban were returning
back to send Arbelo to look after the flow of water so that we may take rest.
On 4.12.2008 at about 0300 hours we entered into the door of his house. The electric
bulbs were on and we saw that the main gate of the house and the door of the
room of Arbelo were opened and two persons among whom one was armed with gun
and the other with pistol, were sitting over Arbelo on his cot. We identified
the persons having gun to be Nazir s/o Bux Ali Ghanghro and also saw clearly
the person armed with pistol and can identify him on seeing again. Then we
raised cries. On the cries Noor Muhammad came there. We saw inside the room
that Arbelo was lying on the cot flat and had died. We then saw  that a shawl
and a rope was tide around the neck of Arbelo. With the help of above witnesses
we brought the dead  body to Government Hospital and gave such information to
the police. After complying with necessary requirements and after getting the
dead body buried, I have now come and complain that accused Nazir Ghanghro and
one unidentified person, whose face was open, whom we have clearly seen on the
light of bulbs and can identify him on seeing again, without any reason have
killed my step son Arbelo by strangulating him with a rope and shawl” 
 
 
3. The applicant was declined bail
by the learned trial Court vide order dated 16.03.2011. 
 
4.  I have heard Mr.Sardar
Akbar F. Ujjan Advocate for the applicant and Mr.Syed Sardar Ali Shah, Assistant
Prosecutor General for the State.
 
5. The learned counsel for the
applicant argued that the applicant has been falsely involved by the
complainant party due to enmity. He further argued that there is an inordinate
and unexplained delay of 11 hours in lodging of the FIR and without lodging of
the FIR all the formalities of preparing inquest report, mashirnamas were
prepared, therefore, the delay in lodging of FIR clearly suggests that the
involvement of the applicant is false and fabricated. He argued that it was
totally an unseen incident and the accused was later implicated after due
deliberation and consultation. He further argued that both the alleged accused
were armed with deadly weapons but instead of using the same in the commission
of offence they strangulated the deceased which creates doubts in the
prosecution case. The learned counsel further argued that the evidence of PW
Ismail Ghanghro is hearsay evidence while the complainant and another PW Qurban
are related inter se, therefore, the matter requires further enquiry. In
support of his arguments, the learned counsel relied upon 2010 MLD 956,
(Miandad vs. State) in which, the learned single judge of this court has
held that the FIR was belated 8 hours and no satisfactory explanation was forthcoming,
therefore bail was granted in this case. He next relied upon 2010 P.Cr.L.J
992, (Mst. Shahida vs. State) in which, the learned single judge of this court
held that unexplained delay in lodging FIR of about 17 hours, particularly
after burial and postmortem of the deceased raised doubt in the case of the
prosecution. It was further held in this case that reasonable doubt being
available in the case of the prosecution as made out in the FIR, same requires
further enquiry and accused under the circumstances was entitled to the benefit
of bail. The learned counsel further relied upon 2008 P.Cr.L.J 1444, (Jaffer
Hussain vs State), in this matter, while deciding the bail application, the
court held that no accused person can be called as history sheeter or a
previous record holder until and unless the offence is proved against him and he
is convicted in the particular offence. Mere pendency of criminal cases in the
Court of law does not entitle the accused to be called history sheeter or
record holder. Lastly, he relied upon 2010 P.Cr.L.J 572 (Muhammad Hassan vs
State) in which, the learned single judge of this court held that law for
the purpose of bail is not to be stretched in favour of the prosecution.
Benefit of doubt if any arising in the case must go to the accused even at bail
state.
 
6. Conversely, the learned APG
argued that the incident was taken place on 3.00 A.M on 04.12.2008 and the matter was reported to the police at 6.25 A.M vide Entry No.31. The postmortem
was conducted at 10.30 A.M and FIR was lodged at 2.00 P.M on 04.12.2008. The learned APG further argued that the applicant was armed with gun which he himself
produced before the police and recovery was properly effected from him and he
further argued that the postmortem report fully supported the ocular testimony and
according to the remarks of medical officer the death was caused due to
strangulation. The learned APG further argued that the eye witness has fully
supported the version of the complainant in his statement recorded under Section
161 Cr.P.C, therefore, he vehemently opposed the grant of bail.
 
7. In the FIR the complainant
has specifically narrated that he and Qurban were returning back to send the
deceased Arbelo to look after  the flow of water so that they may take rest and
on the date of incident at about 300 hours when they reached inside the door of
the house they saw that the main gate of the house and the door of the room of
Arbelo were opened and two persons, out of them, one was armed with gun and
another with pistol, were sitting over Arbelo on his cot and the complainant
and Qurban both identified the applicant armed with pistol and they raised
cries and saw that Arbelo was lying on the cot and a shawl and rope was tied
around his neck and he was found dead. 
 
8. Though, the learned counsel for
the applicant argued that the applicant was falsely implicated in this case due
to enmity but in the bail application not a single word has been alleged to
show what kind of enmity is between the parties which resulted the false
implication of the applicant in this case. The eye witness has also supported
the version of the complainant and the post-mortem report is also reflecting
without any shadow of doubt that there was a mark of ligature on the neck of
deceased at his mid level and medical officer has clearly mentioned that from
the external and internal examination of deceased Arbelo, he is of the opinion
that death of deceased occurred due to asphyxia as a result of strangulation. 
 
9. At the stage of bail deep scrutiny
of evidence is not permissible and nor is the requirement of law but at the
same time the court of law is not precluded from tentative pursuing the
evidence of eye witnesses, recovery of weapons, medical evidence and other
connected evidence if any  to  form a tentative assessment as to the accused is
prima facie connected with the commission of offence or not. At the stage of
deciding bail, the court needs not to enter upon the deep appreciation and
examination of evidence. However, the question can not be decided in vacuum and
court has to look at the material available. If the answer is in positive keeping
in view the tentative opinion that the accused is prima facie connected with
the commission of the offence of murder or where the sentence  provided is either
death or life imprisonment, then refusal of bail is rule while grant of bail is
an exception and there is no restriction of the court powers to assess the
evidentiary value of the material placed before it. No doubt accused person is
entitled to the benefit of doubt at bail stage also but doubt should be shown
to exist on a cursory reading of evidence and law and this can be discerned by
tentative evaluation of the material on record. The learned counsel argued that
co-accused Zameer has been admitted to bail by this Court in Cr.B.A.No. 86/2009.
The bail was granted to him simply for the reason that his name was not
mentioned in the FIR while the present applicant has been specifically named and
nominated in the FIR. The learned counsel also complained that more than 2
years have passed but the trial has not been concluded. This particular plea
has been perfectly answered by the learned trial court in its order dated
16.03.2011 that after framing of charge on 22.9.2010, either the accused or his
counsel sought adjournments on several dates of hearing on one or other pretext
even on 16.3.2011, the learned defence counsel argued the bail application for
its decision but failed to proceed with the trial although three material
prosecution witnesses including the complainant were in attendance but
subsequently the learned defence counsel moved an adjournment application,
therefore, the learned trial court observed that the prosecution can not be
blamed for non conclusion of the trial expeditiously and if the accused and his
counsel cooperates with the court then the case could easily be decided on its
merits. 
 
10. The main thrust of the arguments
of learned counsel that the FIR was belatedly lodged but it reflects from the
record that the incident occurred at 3 A.M on 4.12.2008 and on 6.25 A.M on the same date the matter was reported to police by the complainant vide Entry
No.31. Postmortem was started at 10.30 AM and concluded on 11.50 A.M, however FIR was lodged at 2.00 A.M on the same date. The dead body was brought to the
port-mortem by the head constable Mohammad Uris, vide letter No.311, dated
4.12.2008. The complainant and qurban both are eye witness. Under Section 154
CR.P.C, a statutory duty is cast upon officer in charge of police station to
enter information regarding commission of any cognizable offence. The purpose
of recording FIR apart from setting law into motion, is also to provide basis
for carrying out investigation in the right direction. Record shows that the
complainant approached the concerned police station on the same day at about
6.25 A.M to set the law into motion but instead of registering the FIR, his NC
was registered vide entry No.31 and in fact, in this report also, the
complainant has named the applicant, therefore, no delay can be attributed to
the complainant at this stage if the police has violated the mandatory
provision of Section 154 Cr.p.c and instead of registering the FIR at 6.25 A.M,
registered the same at 2.00 P.M on the same day. The case law referred to by
the learned counsel for the applicant on the ground of delay are
distinguishable.  
 
11. The medical certificate fully
supports the version of the complainant and the cause of death is asphyxia as a
result of strangulation. Since the specific role has been attributed to the
applicant and he is named in the FIR, therefore, the applicant has no case for the
grant of bail. Every hypothetical question which can be managed would not make
the same a case of further enquiry simply for the reason that same can be
answered by trial Court subsequently after evaluation of evidence. Accused in
order to release on bail must further show that there is no reasonable ground
for believing that he has committed the offence as alleged against him. Mere
possibility of further enquiry which exist, almost in every criminal case is no
ground for treating the matter as one under Sub-section 2 of Section 497,
Cr.P.C. The case of further enquiry would only be made out when data collected
by the prosecution is not sufficient to provide reasonable ground for believing
that a prima facie case exists against accused.
 
12. The upshot of the above discussion leads me to a
conclusion that there are no reasonable grounds to believe that applicant has been
falsely implicated in the case. Consequently, the bail application is
dismissed. Since the challan has already been submitted in the trial Court,
therefore, the learned trial Court is directed to conclude the trial preferably
within a period of 03 months. The observations made herein above are tentative
in nature and would not affect the case of either party.
 
Sukkur:-
Dated.
26.8.2011                                                           Judge



