



Marriage Case




ORDER SHEET
 
IN THE HIGH COURT OF SINDH, KARACHI
 
Criminal Bail
Application No.571 of 2009
 

Date                                       
Order with signature of Judge

 
Applicants Muhammad
Hanif S. Kalia and two others through Dr. Muhammad Farogh Naseem and Mr Shaukat
Hayat, advocate.
 
The State through Mr.
Shahab Sarki, learned Standing Counsel.
 
…..
 
MUHAMMED
KARIM KHAN AGHA, J.,  By this order we intend to dispose of
criminal bail application No.571/2009, arising out of FIR No.76/2008, lodged on
15.11.2008 at about 15.10 hours, (the “FIR”), under Sections 5,8 and
22/23 of Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947 (“FERA, 1947”) read with
Sections 7, 8 and 20 of Prevention of Electronic Crime Ordinance, 2007 (“PECO,
2007”) and Sections 420,467, 471,477-A/34, PPC at FIA, Crime Circle,
Karachi.
 
2.         The
applicants applied for bail in Special Court (Offences in Banks), Sindh at Karachi, (the “Special Court”) in Sessions Case No.56 of 2008, who declined bail to
all the applicants vide its order dated 21.4.2009 (“Impugned Order”). Hence
this application for bail.
 
3.         The
brief facts of the prosecution case, as disclosed in the FIR, are as follows:-
 
“Consequent upon
enquiry No.118/2008 of FIA, Crime Circle, Karachi, initiated on a complaint of
State Bank of Pakistan against illegal foreign exchange operators it has
transpired that the Directors, Partners and Franchisees of M/s Khanani &
Kalia International, being licensed Exchange Company, besides their authorized
exchange business, have also been indulging in the huge illegal transfer of
money to the tune of billions of rupees, in collusion with different banks,
exchange companies, money changers, businessmen and private parties.
 
The enquiry has
further revealed that in order to conduct this illegal business of foreign
exchange racketeering, the Partners/Directors of M/s Khanani and Kalia
International, besides their official websites for transactions i.e. www.remitton.com  and www.kkionline.com also created
fraudulently with criminal intention replica website www.clickpk.net without the knowledge of
State Bank of Pakistan to effect illegal transfers of money from and into
Pakistan in a clandestine manner. This illegal exchange system worked side by
side, with their legal/declared system, being controlled from their Head Office
network situated at 110-1105, Saima Trade Tower, I.I. Chundrigar Road, Karachi,
throughout Pakistan in collusion with their Franchisees as well as a number of
other offices all over Pakistan. For the purpose, a very huge computer system
having sophisticated heavy duty machines was installed at the premises of this
Head Office having a network of numerous client stations inside and outside Pakistan having direct automated access through internet codes and passwords. In order to
facilitate the business of illegal exchange, the accused persons used the
services of M/s Al-Zarooni Exchange, UAE, having Atif Polani and Javed Qasim as
the focal persons to facilitate and execute all such transactions in UAE.
 
As per modus
operandi discovered during the course of enquiry, a large number of Exchange
Companies/firms and agents outside Pakistan used to receive the amounts from
Overseas Pakistanis on behalf of accused persons, for remitting the same to
Pakistan but instead of transferring these amounts to Pakistan through the
authorized Banks duly declared to State Bank of Pakistan, they either used to
retain the same abroad, or used to transfer them to any of the foreign currency
accounts/benami accounts in Pakistan opened and operated in collusion with the
other persons/employees, secretly and illegally to conceal these remittances.
These remittances were illegally held in these foreign currency accounts and were
never sold/declared to State Bank of Pakistan, while the equivalent amounts
payable against these remittances were disbursed in Pak. rupees to the
relatives/recipients of such overseas Pakistanis from their “own” resources in Pakistan. Thus the accused person and their franchisees/agents deprived Govt. of Pakistan
of foreign exchange to the tune of billions of dollars in past few years.
 
In order to further
misuse this foreign exchange retained in these foreign currency accounts, the
accused persons, with common objectives and criminal intentions, in collusion
with the concerned bank officers and others, manipulated the transfer back of
this foreign exchange to different foreign companies, individuals and exporters
as “Hawala transfers” on behest of a large number of businessmen, to meet the
under invoiced amounts required to be paid illegally to such foreign exporters
in connection with their “misdeclared” imports, to evade import duties and
taxes. Besides, huge Hawala transfers were made to different banks,
construction companies and institutions abroad illegally, after taking
substantial commissions being illegal gains. Thus this huge foreign exchange
which should have been earned to Pakistan was reversed back to other countries
causing loss of billons of dollars to Pakistan in terms of foreign exchange to
facilitate those who had earned money in Pakistan through illegal means.
 
The enquiry has
further revealed that the above accused persons, for the purpose of illegal
transfer of money, had active connivance of some Directors/Partners of other
exchange companies and money changers and they used to “facilitate, assist and
accommodate” each other on “give and take” of illegal foreign exchange as per
market requirements.
 
The accused
Directors/Partners of M/s Khanani and Kalia International (Pvt) Limited, in
complexity with others contravened the provisions of sections 5,8 and 22 of
Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947 and thereby caused huge loss of foreign
exchange to the tune of billons of rupees to Govt. of Pakistan and committed
the offences of fraud/forgery through computer/internet punishable under
Section 23 of Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947, read with section 7,8 and
20 of the Prevention of Electronic Crime Ordinance, 2007 and under section 420,467,471,477-A/34,
PPC. Hence this case is registered under the orders of the competent
authority.”
 
 
4.         During
the course of trial, interim charge sheet bearing No.117/2008 was submitted on 04.12.2008,
supplementary charge sheet bearing No.5/2009 was submitted on 06.01.2009 and
the final charge sheet bearing No.23/2009 was filed on 06.3.2009. All the
applicants were arrested on 08.11.2008 and since then they have been in judicial
custody. 
 
5.         In a nutshell,
the case against the applicants, who were Directors/Partners/Shareholders in
M/s Khanani and Kalia International (Pvt) Limited (“KKI”), is that they
had setup an illegal parallel website, which enabled them to illegally and secretly
engage in unreported forex and Hawala Trading. By this mechanism of the
applicants there was no physical transfer of any forex from Pakistan and that
as a result of this illegal forex/Hawala Trading the applicants had breached
and/or violated the rules and regulations of the State Bank of Pakistan (“SBP”),
the terms of their license and also other laws such as FERA 1947 , PECO 1997
and PPC which had the result of depriving the national exchequer of huge
amounts of forex which it would have earned in the shape of commission had the
transactions been carried out through regular SBP channels.
 
6.         The
learned counsel for the applicants admit that the applicants were an authorized
licensee of the SBP to carry out foreign exchange business but that they were
doing so strictly in accordance with the terms and conditions of their license.
He did not dispute that there may have been in existence a parallel website
which was carrying out illegal/unauthorized business of foreign exchange but
such parallel website had nothing to do with the applicants.
 
7.         During
the arguments, learned counsel for the applicants contended that this case has
been fabricated and foisted upon the applicants by the FIA in order to make the
applicants scapegoats for the poor economic conditions prevailing in the
country. He pointed out that under Section 23 FERA, 1947, the maximum sentence
is two years and fine or both and under Section 7 PECO, 2007, the maximum
sentence is seven years. According to him, the FIA had malafidedly filed this
case in the Special Court only to enable them to have the benefit of a maximum
sentence of ten years which would make it more difficult for the applicants to be
granted bail as the case would now fall into the non bailable category under the
proviso to section 497 (2) Cr. P.C.
 
8.         Learned
counsel for the applicants emphasized that the Offences in respect of Banks (Special
Courts), Ordinance 1984 (“Ordinance, 1984”), which dealt with offenses
in respect of banks only, was not applicable and the Special Court had no
jurisdiction to hear this case under Ordinance, 1984 as the applicants were Directors/partners/shareholders
of an Exchange Company and the alleged offenses came under the purview of FERA,
1947 and PECO, 2007. He also argued that under Section 2(d) of Ordinance, 1984
the offences, with which the applicants are charged, in the FIR, had not been
mentioned as scheduled offences and, therefore, the Special Court had no
jurisdiction to take cognizance of the offences. He further contended that
under Ordinance, 1984 the investigation had to be initiated on a complaint but
in this case no such complaint existed and the FIA had malefidely acted on their
own initiative. In support of his contentions he has relied on the case of
MUHAMMAD HASHIM v. PRESIDING OFFICER, SPECIAL BANKING COURT (2006 P.CR.L.J.
1886) and the case of A. HABIB AHMED v. M.K.G. SCOTT CHRISTIAN (PLD 1992 SC
353).
 
9.         Learned
counsel for the applicants vehemently denied the allegation that the applicants
had opened the benami accounts and contended that there was no evidence to
connect the applicants with the alleged offence. The so-called benami accounts
had been opened by other people, who had no connection with the applicants. He
further submitted that none of the alleged benami account holders listed in the
charge sheet mentioned the names of the applicants and that the applicants had
no concern with the companies, which are mentioned in the final charge sheet. Such
documents may have mentioned Altaf Khanani, however, the applicants had nothing
to do with him in any business dealings which he may have conducted in respect
of this case. They cannot be held responsible for his actions simply because he
is related to them.
 
10.       Learned
counsel for the applicants also submitted that according to the challan the
applicants are involved in the offences of this case only in terms of colluding
with the bank officials in the alleged scam and as such at best could be seen
as playing a minor role. He drew the Court’s attention to the fact that the
so-called major players like the bankers had already been granted bail by this
Court and as such under the rule of consistency the applicants were also
entitled to the grant of bail. This is more so, since the role of the
applicants, according to the challan, is lesser than the bankers. In this
respect he has relied on the following case law:-
 
(i)                 
SHUJAT HUSSAIN v. STATE (1995 SCMR 1249);
(ii)               
ABDUL AZIZ KHAN NIAZI v. STATE (PLD 2003 SC 668);
(iii)              
MUHAMMAD DAUD v. STATE 92008 SCMR 173);
 
11.       Learned
counsel for the applicants referred to Sections 420,467, 471,477-A/34, PPC and
submitted that none of these sections were attracted to the alleged actions of
the applicants.  He drew the Court’s attention to the fact that this case involves
a white collar crime and huge documentary evidence is required, thus, it is a
fit case for further enquiry within the meaning of Section 497(2), Cr.P.C. and
as such the applicants are entitled to the concession of bail. He further
submitted that where the applicants have been charged under more than one
offence then for the purposes of bail the charges having lesser sentence should
be considered. He has relied on the following case law in support of his above
contentions:-
 
(i)                 
MUHAMMAD SAEED MEHDI v. STATE (2002 SCMR 282);
(ii)               
ABDUL MAJID v. JUDGE, SPECIAL COURT (OFFENCES IN BANKS) (1986 P.CR. L.
J. 890);
(iii)              
SAEED AHMED v. STATE (1996 SCMR 1132);
(iv)             
AMIR AHMED HASHMI v. STATE (PLD 2004 Karachi 617);
(v)               
MUZAMMIL NIAZI v. STATE (PLD 2003 Karachi 526);
 
 
12.       With
regard to the Impugned Order, he submitted that the applicants had only been
denied bail because the bankers had at that stage already been denied bail by
the Special Court, however, since the bankers had now been granted bail by this
  Hon’ble Court this hurdle had now been overcome.
 
13.       Learned
counsel for the applicants submitted that bail could not be withheld as
punishment and that the benefit of doubt was to go to the applicants and cited
the general principle of bail, all of which applied to the applicants in this
case. He placed reliance on the following authorities in this respect:-
 
(i)                 
MANZOOR v. STATE (PLD 1972 SC 81);
(ii)               
AMIR v. STATE (PLD 1972 SC 277);
(iii)              
MOHD. HANIF v. STATE (1978 SCMR 69);
(iv)             
MUHAMMAD ASLAM v. STATE (1992 MLD 880);
 
 
14.       He
further submitted that statements of the applicants recorded under Section 161,
Cr.P.C. have no evidentiary value, that they had been recorded after coercion and
that there were material contradictions not only in the Section 161, Cr.P.C. statements
but also in the challan and the charge sheet. He placed reliance on the
following authorities:-
 
(i)                 
ASIF JAMEEL v. STATE (2003 MLD 676(c));
(ii)               
SALIM JAVED DURRANI v. STATE (PLJ 2005 Peshawar 7(ii));
(iii)              
NUSRATULLAH v. STATE (1995 MLD 1635(b));
(iv)             
RUKHSAR AHMAD v. STATE (2005 P.CR.L.J.988(a));
(v)               
MUHAMMAD FAROOQ AFRIDI v. STATE (2003 YLR 2700(d)):
(vi)             
MUHAMMAD BASHIR GURAYA v. RAJA MUHAMMAD IRSHAD (2005 YLR 1220(b));
(vii)            
SAJJAD HUSSAIN v. STATE (PLD 1996 Lahore 286(a));
(viii)          
KHALIL AHMAD v. STATE (2003 P.CR.L.J. 1754):
(ix)             
MUHAMMAD RIAZ MUNNA v. STATE (1993 SCMR 1321);
(x)               
MAZULLAH v. ABDUR REHMAN (1997 SCMR 1836);
(xi)             
SUBA KHAN v. MUHAMMAD AJMAL (2006 SCMR 66(c)):
(xii)            
MUHAMMAD KHAN v. STATE (PLJ 2001 CR.CASES (QUETTA) 978(i);
(xiii)          
MAUJAN JATOI v. STATE (2001 YLR 2849); and
(xiv)          
MIR HASSAN v. STATE (PLD 2006 Karachi 472)
 
15.       According
to him, the documents relied upon by the Prosecution had also been acquired as
a result of an illegal seizure and as such they were liable to be excluded from
consideration in the instant bail application. He placed reliance on the
following authorities:-
 
(i)                 
COLLECTOR OF SALES TAX AND CENTRAL EXCISE v. MEGA TECH (PVT.) LTD. (2005
SCMR 1166);
(ii)               
COLLECTOR OF SALES TAX AND CENTRAL EXCISE v. MEGA TECH (PVT.) LTD. (2005
PTD 1933);
 
 
16.       He
submitted that the Prosecution had failed to make out a prima facie case
against the applicants as they had not been able to connect them to any of the
offences, any of the transactions and the parallel website www.clickpk.net which allegedly was the hub
for carrying out the illegal transactions.
 
17.       For
all the above reasons learned counsel for the applicants submitted that the
applicants were entitled to be enlarged on bail.
 
18.       On the
other hand, learned Standing Counsel submitted that based on the FIR, challan, statements
recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C. and other documentary evidence on the
Special Courts record, there was a strong case against the applicants in their capacity
as directors/partners of KKI.
 
19.       According
to the learned Standing Counsel, the applicants had a website authorized by the
SBP for carrying out their business as licensed money changers. By using this
website all the applicants’ transactions were disclosed to the SBP and SBP was
able to collect information of these forex transactions and regulate its
foreign exchange position by keeping a watch over inflow and outflow of forex
both into and out of Pakistan. According to the learned Standing Counsel, KKI,
which was run by the applicants as Directors/Partners,  created a parallel
website known as www.clickpk.net which
was not authorized by the SBP. This was an illegal website through which hundreds
of illegal transactions took place about which the SBP had no knowledge.
Learned Standing Counsel submitted that in effect KKI was using the illegal
Hawala system, which was bypassing the SBP regulations and were causing colossal
losses to SBP and the national exchequer in terms of forex.
 
20.       In a nutshell,
learned Standing Counsel submitted that there was sufficient evidence to show
that www.clickpk.net had been established
by the applicants and that benami accounts belonging to others had been
established by the applicants and operated by others through the applicants and
that there was evidence gathered showing that there was a nexus between the www.clickpk.net and the applicants. In
particular he pointed to the relationship between KKI and Kalsoft a sister
company of KKI which had been used to purchase the sophisticated equipment
needed to carry out the parallel website
 
21.       In
support of his contentions, learned Standing Counsel took the Court through
various portions of 161, Cr.P.C. statements which confirmed that the benami
accounts had been opened in the names of employees of KKI without there
knowledge and had been operated by the applicants without there knowledge. That
www.clickpk.net had been set up by and
was controlled by the applicants for the specific purpose of running an illegal
banking system in parallel with there authorized website. In particular, he
pointed out the statements recorded under Section 161, Cr.P.C. which showed
that the applicants had purchased the computer equipments (software) to enable
them to run a parallel website and pinpointed the role of Amir Zakaria, who was
an employee of KKI, who had opened and had operated many of the benami
accounts. He further submitted that the documents on record show the link with
the applicants to Messrs Polani Enterprises and Messrs Global Village Exchange through
their shared directorships and relatives which were companies involved in the
scam. 
 
22.       In
respect of under invoicing, learned Standing Counsel, in particular, referred
to transactions in respect of M/s Camozzi, and ran the court through
various documents connecting the under invoicing to both KKI and M/s Al-Zarooni
Exchange, UAE, which, according to him, was sister company of KKI, which was
operating in Dubai, UAE and was the hub of the Dubai end of the Hawala operation.
According to him other documents disclosed that there were six similar separate
sets of transactions concerning such under invoicing involving different
companies. Again the net result of such transactions was the loss of precious
forex to Pakistan.
 
23.       With
regard to the jurisdiction of Ordinance, 1984, learned Standing Counsel
submitted that this was covered by preamble to the Ordinance and that all the
sections applied by the prosecution are already given in the first schedule of
Ordinance, 1984 and that the Special Court had jurisdiction in this matter. He
further contended that the rule of consistency does not apply in this case as the
case of the applicants is on different footings to that of the others, who had
already been granted bail by this Court in this case. In those cases, he
submitted the bankers had played a minor role whereas the applicants were the
main beneficiaries of the scam.
 
24.       Learned
Standing Counsel further contended that bail is not a matter of right and that
the applicants cannot rely on the technical ground that the offences, with which
the applicants are charged, do not fall under Ordinance, 1984 because they had
not been listed as scheduled offences in the FIR. He also stated that this case
was a heinous crime and the applicants are not entitled to the concession of bail.
He has placed reliance on the following case law in support of his
submissions:- 
 
(i)                 
HAQ NAWAZ MALIK v. STATE (2002 P.CR.L.J. 739);
(ii)               
PROVINCE OF PUNJAB v. MUQARAB ALI (2008 SCMR 572);
(iii)              
MUHAMMAD HAYAT v. STATE (1999 P.CR.L.J. 1352);
(iv)             
TUBBASAM AHMED QURESHI v. STATE (2000 P.CR.L.J. 105);
(v)               
KHALID HUSSAIN v. KALA KHAN (2004 P.CR.L.J. 1080);
(vi)             
MUHAMMAD AZIZ v. KAMAL KHAN (2001 SCMR 1727);
 
 
25.       We
have carefully reviewed the documents on record and considered both the written
and oral arguments of learned counsel as well as the authorities cited by them.

 
26.       We
would like to deal with each of the issues one by one as follows:-
 
COMPLAINT:
 
27.       We
find no merit in the contention of the applicants’ advocate that the inquiry
has not been initiated on a complaint made by the SBP. By letter dated
11.7.2008, the Governor, SBP wrote to the Advisor to the Prime Minister on
Interior & narcotics Controls, to take action against illegal foreign
exchange operators. The contents of the said letter are reproduced herein
below:-
 
“Dear Malik Sahib,
 
Subject: Action
against Illegal Foreign Exchange Operators
 
I
would like to draw your attention to an issue of critical importance especially
backdrop of current crisis in exchange markets. Given complications and recent
press the exchange markets, SBP has taken a number of steps including measures
to unauthorized and illegal flight of capital. However, with the tightening of
our rules and regulations governing banks and exchange companies, it is being
apprehended that desirous of undertaking foreign exchange transactions which
are otherwise not permitted may resort to unauthorized and illegal operators.
 
With
a view to stop these illegal operators, I request you to kindly advise the related
agencies to initiate a special law-enforcement action campaign against the
illegal foreign exchange operators in Pakistan. I and my staff from the
Exchange Policy Department very happy to provide any assistance in the matter. (italics
added)
 
With best regards,
                                                                        Yours
sincerely
 
                                                                            
Sd/-
Mr. Rehman A. Malik                                
Dr. Shamshad Akhtar
Advisor to the Prime
Minister
On Interior and
Narcotics Controls
Government of Pakistan
Islamabad.”
 
28.       This
letter is a general authorization made by the SBP to the Ministry of Interior
(“MoI”) to carry out inquiry against any foreign exchange operator in Pakistan as, more particularly, mentioned in the last paragraph of the aforesaid letter.
Thus, as the FIA falls under the control of MoI we are of the view that the
inquiry has been initiated by the FIA against the applicants in accordance with
law.
 
JURISDICTION:
 
29.       Ordinance
IX of 1984 in its preamble states as under:-
 
“WHEREAS it is expedient to provide for speedy
trial of certain offences committed in respect of banks and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto”. (italics added)
 
30.       Under
Section 2(a) of Ordinance, 1984, it is true that KKI, of which the applicants
were Partners/Directors, does not fall within the definition of Bank for the
purposes of Ordinance of 1984. KKI is a licensed Exchange Company 
 
31.       Ordinance
1984 , however, in its preamble makes it clear that Ordinance, 1984 should
cover offences committed in respect of banks and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto (italics added). The documents, on record,
reveal that a large part of the allegedly illegal transactions involved the illegal
and fraudulent opening and operation of various bank accounts in Banks covered
by the definition of Section 2(a) with various bank managers of such banks having
also been charged for their involvement in the same case. In our view,
therefore, the matter is directly connected to offences committed in respect of
Banks. 
 
32.       Furthermore,
based on the ejusdem generis rule, it can be said that the transactions or
documentation used in the commission of the alleged offences are matters which
are connected with or incidental to offences committed in respect of Banks and,
therefore, also fall within the purview of Ordinance 1984. 
 
33.       The
cases relied upon by the applicants counsel are distinguishable on the basis
that in none of those cases was the business of the accused in anyway  involved
in the business of banking, the bank was simply used to facilitate its
transaction. In this case, however, the applicants’ license(s) as an Exchange
Company is closely connected with the whole banking system through its dealings
with forex. The applicants could not even engage in such business without a
license from the SBP which is the main regulator of the banking system in Pakistan.
 
34.       In
this respect we would refer to KKI’s own webpage which in part states as
under:-
 
“To evolve a
documented economy, in 2003, State Bank of Pakistan converted money changers
throughout the country into exchange companies. Under the rules and regulations
stated by SBP, all the exchange companies have been granted permission to
make home remittance transactions, making of traveler’s cheques, issuing demand
drafts besides the core business of currency exchange catering the customers at
national and international levels. KKI sincerely embraced the decision and
holds the privilege to stand among the early birds to get the exchange company
license by SBP.(italics added)
……………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………
Keeping in front,
the importance of economic stability for the country, KKI has and will always
work for the betterment of the country with respect to its services and
innovative marketing techniques. We affirm that we will Inshallah, play a
major role in increasing the nations foreign exchange reserves to a massive
volume in the coming days through our efforts and will play an effective role
in combating against money laundering along with our central bank. As always,
KKI will be a step ahead in taking every necessary step to make rules,
regulations and policies, which may leave no stone unturned to safe guard
against money laundering and all money related crimes. KKI also believes
that the world has changed so much that the traditional way of doing business
will not help individuals or even the nations way longer towards the way to
progress and prosperity. KKI believes that the use of IT in its business will
introduce new horizons of working for the company, will improve its efficiency
and in return the customers will get best possible services, IT based
transaction facilities ensuring their maximum security, benefits and best
returns.”(italics added)
 
35.       In
order, however, for the offences to be tried under Ordinance, 1984 another hurdle
must be crossed i.e. that the offence must be a scheduled offence as set out in
Section 2(d) of Ordinance, 1984.
 
36.       Under
Section 2(d) of Ordinance, 1984, scheduled offences are specified in the First
Schedule and are alleged to have been committed in respect of or in connection
with the business of the bank. The following sections in the FIR namely
420,467,471, 477-A, PPC, are all scheduled offences under the first schedule
and as such we find that the above Offenses so charged are all triable under Ordinance,
1984.
 
37.       With
regard to the offenses themselves, we find little merit in the applicants’
contention that the actions carried out by the applicants/accused do not come
within the purview of these sections. The Sections 420,467, 471,477-A/34, PPC, cover
cheating, forgery, falsification of accounts and acts done by several persons,
and the documents on record indicate that the actions of the applicants if
proven would amount to at least some of the offences so charged. Even then the
appropriate forum to agitate the non applicability of these sections is before
the trial court and not at the stage of bail.
 
38.       With
respect to the question of any loss which the banks may have suffered we do not
agree that the banks suffered no loss. The whole banking system of Pakistan (as
regulated by the SBP) of which the banks form part suffered a loss on account
of the applicant’s actions not only financially but also in terms of reputation
and standing. The entire banking system, which in the wider sense in our view
includes all such entities governed or supervised by the SBP including Money
Exchanges through the actions of the applicants was manipulated and may have
been subject to loss.
 
DOCUMENTS (including
S.161 statements)
 
39.       It has
been vehemently argued by learned counsel for the applicants that the entire
case of the prosecution is based on documents, which have no evidentiary value,
have been obtained through coercion and are unreliable being contradictory and
suspicious in many instances in terms of dates and signatures. The applicants
claim that some of these documents have been pre-prepared by the FIA with the
alleged maker being coerced into signing the same. 
 
40.       Furthermore,
according to the learned counsel for the applicants since all the documents
have been illegally acquired through an illegal search and seizure process in
breach of the relevant legal procedures they must be excluded from the trial.
In this event, there will be no case against the applicants and, therefore, the
applicants are entitled to bail. 
 
41.       In
addition to the earlier authorities cited on this point learned counsel for the
applicants has placed reliance on the unreported order passed by this Court in
Special Criminal Bail Applications Nos.50 to 52 of 2004 titled as MEHBOOB
KUKASWADIA v. STATE, whereby he alleged that at the time of bail the question
of the legality of the search and seizure can be considered. 
 
42.       In our
view the above referred unreported case is distinguishable on the ground that there
was an illegal search of a person as opposed to a premise and the alleged
illegal search was not the primary reason for the granting of bail in that
case. Furthermore, in that case no mention was made of excluding any of the
evidence recovered on account of the illegal search of the person.
 
43.       If we were
to exclude all the documents, as prayed by the applicants, this may lead to the
collapse of virtually the entire prosecution case prior to the trial. Since
this is a white collar crime it is not unusual that most of the evidence is of a
documentary nature. In our view, for a High Court to rule upon the
admissibility of documents prior to the trial would amount to usurping
the right of the trial Court to try the case under the appropriate laws of
procedure and evidence as laid down in Cr.P.C. and the Qanoon-e-Shahadat Order,
1984. 
 
44.       In our
view, the question of dealing with the admissibility, legality, proof of
documents should, at the first instance, be determined by the trial Court,
especially, in cases of a white collar crime, which are largely based on
documents which may need to be proved through witnesses.
 
45.       Furthermore,
during a bail application the court is only entitled to make a brief review of
the case file in order to determine whether a prima facie case has been made
out not to look into such details as the admissibility of documents, the manner
of there seizure etc which are all matters which are to be properly adjudicated
upon by the trial Court at first instance. Reliance is placed on the case of FATIMA v. ABDUL MAJID (2004 YLR 400) which reads at page 404 as follows:-
 
“It
would be seen that in matters concerning bail the pristine principle to be
followed by Courts is that the exercise to be carried out by the Court is a
preliminary one and is restricted to a tentative sifting of the evidence on the
record as opposed to an elaborate sifting of the same. In this regard reference
can be made to Khalid Javed Gillan v. The State PLD 1978 SC 256 and
Saeed Akbar v. Gul Akbar 1996 SCMR 931. Such principle as laid down by the
Honourable Supreme Court is a salutary one which would leave the detailed
appreciation of evidence to the trial Court so as not to embarrass the trial of
the accused at the bail granting stage.
 
 
46.       As
such, we do not consider it appropriate to delve into the question of
admissibility/exclusion/proof of documents at this premature stage of the trial
and for the purposes of this bail application we will treat the documents on
face value. 
 
47.       Learned
counsel for the applicants has cited the following authorities on the point of
proof of documents through modern devices. Once again we consider that the
appropriate forum, at first instance, for such arguments to be made is before
the trial court at the time when the Prosecution seeks to admit the document
into evidence.
 
(i)                 
SIRAJUDDIN v. G.M. KHAN (1990 CLC 331);
(ii)               
GHULAM ALI v. HASHUM (1986 CLC 1165);
(iii)              
HAKIM ALI BHATTI v. ABDUL HAKIM (1986 CLC 1784).
 
 
RULE OF
CONSISTENCY:
 
48.       It is
true that some of the accused in this case have already been granted bail and
on this basis the applicants claim to be entitled to bail on the ground of rule
of consistency. Each case, however, will turn on its own particular facts and
circumstances. 
 
49.       In our
view, the case of the applicants is distinguishable from the other accused, who
have already been granted bail by this Court in this case. This is because, in
our view, a tentative review of the documents on record, indicate that the
applicants were the masterminds behind the scam and that the bank managers/employees,
who have been granted bail, were only minor figures/scapegoats. The role and
level of participation between the applicants and the bank managers/employees,
who had been granted bail, therefore, stands on an entirely different footing. As
such the rule of consistency is not applicable based on the facts and
circumstances of this case.
 
REASONABLE
GROUNDS/FURTHER INQUIRY:
 
50.       As we
have held that Ordinance 1984 is applicable the offenses become non bailable
for which the requirements of the proviso of S.497 (2) need to be satisfied in
order for the applicants to be granted bail.
 
51.       Section
5(6) of Ordinance, 1984 reads as under:-
 
“5.  Procedure of
a Special Court. (1) ………..………………..
(2)
………………………………………………………………...
(3)
………………………………………………………………...
(4)
………………………………………………………………...
(5)
………………………………………………………………...
(6) An accused
person shall not be released on bail by a Special Court, or by any other court,
if there appear reasonable grounds for believing that he has been guilty
of a scheduled offence, nor shall an accused person be so released unless the
prosecution has been given notice to show cause why he should not be so
released.” (italics added)
 
52.       The
proviso to Section 497(2), Cr.P.C. reads as under:-
 
“497. When bail
may be taken in cases of non-bailable offence. (1) ……………………………………………………….
     (2) If it
appears to such officer or Court at any stage of the investigation, inquiry or
trial, as the case may be, that there are no reasonable grounds for
believing that the accused has committed a non-bailable offence but that
there are sufficient grounds for further inquiry into his guilt the accused
shall, pending such inquiry, be released on bail, or, at the discretion of such
officer or Court, on the execution by him a bond without sureties for his
appearance as hereinafter provided.” (italics added)
 
 
53.       In the
case of GHULAM HUSSAIN v. STATE (1990 P.Cr.L.J. 577), although not in respect
of a bail application, prima facie case was defined as under:-
 
“Prima facie case
which has not been defined anywhere means a case where charge against the
accused is not groundless and there was a ground to proceed against him.”
 
54.       In
essence, in order for bail to be denied, the prosecution needs to establish reasonable
grounds/prima facie that the accused has committed the offense and that it is
not a case of further inquiry.
 
55.       In the
case of SIKANDAR A. KARIM v. STATE (1995 SCMR 387), which was concerned with
the grant of bail, under the proviso to Section 497(2) Cr.P.C. reasonable
ground was defined as follows:-
 
“Reasonable ground
is an expression which connotes that the grounds be such as would appeal to a
reasonable man for connecting the accused with the crime with which he is charged,
“grounds” being a word of higher import than “suspicion”. However strong a
suspicion may be, it would not take the place of reasonable grounds. Grounds
will have to be tested by reason for there acceptance or rejection .The
reasonableness of the grounds has to be shown by the prosecution by displaying
its cards to the court, as it may possess or is expecting to possess as
demonstrating evidence available in the case both direct and circumstantial .
If such grounds exist tending  to connect the accused with the crime,
bail should be refused, without the need to go into a deeper appreciation of the
merits of those grounds and the evidence on which they are rested, which
functions are to be assumed at the trial stage. However, if it is found
that the charge is groundless, that is, to say unsupported by any evidence or
instead of the grounds being reasonable, their absurdity stands exposed  on a
plain view, or the charge on its face value is reduced to a minor one which is
not punishable with death or transportation for life, as for example where it
is a case of accidental and unintended death caused by simple hurt, the
limitation on the Courts’ discretion is in favour of the grant of bail.”
(italics added)
 
 
56.       In the
case of TARIQ BASHIR v. STATE (PLD 1995 SC 34) the reasonable grounds are
defined at page 41 as under:-
 
“8.  The case-law on
the subject of bail is very much clear that the bail order must be carefully
balanced and weighed in scale of justice and requirement of relevant law.
Reasonable grounds mean grounds which appeal to a reasonable and prudent man.” 
 
57.       It was
also held by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the above case as under:-
 
“7.  As regards the
first category of offences (punishable with death, or imprisonment for life, or
with ten years’ imprisonment) the provisions of section 497(1) are not punitive
in nature. There is no concept of punishment before judgment in the criminal
law of the land. The question of grant of bail is to be determined judiciously
having regard to the facts and circumstances of each case. Where the
prosecution satisfies the Court, that there are reasonable grounds to believe
that the accused has committed the crime falling in the first category the
Court must refuse bail…….”
 
 
58.       As
regards further inquiry, there is no hard and fast rule on this matter and each
case will turn on its own particular facts. Reliance is placed on GHULAM ABBAS
v. STATE (2005 P.Cr.L.J. 244 relevant at 247) as follows:-
 
“Section 497(2),
Cr.P.C. provides that if it appears to the Court at any stage that there are no
reasonable grounds for believing that accused committed a non-bailable offence,
but there are sufficient grounds for further inquiry into his guilt, such
accused shall be released on bail. Now what will continue as sufficient
grounds for further inquiry would depend upon peculiar facts of each case and
no hard and fast rule can be laid down for that purpose. Every hypothetical
question which can be imagined would not make it a case of further inquiry
simply for the reason that it can be answered by the trial Court subsequently,
after evaluation of evidence. The condition laid down in clause (2) of
section 497, Cr.P.C. is that there are sufficient grounds for further inquiry
into his guilt which means that the question should be such which has nexus
with the result of the case and may show or tend to show that accused is not
guilty of the offence with which he is charge.” (italics added)
 
59.       Further,
the mere possibility of further inquiry exists in nearly all bail related
cases. Reliance is placed on PARVEEN AKHTAR v. STATE (SCMR 2002 1886 relevant
at 1888) as follows:-
 
“We have heard
learned counsel for the parties and have also gone through the record, which
has been made available for our inspection by learned Assistant
Advocate-General. It may be noted that as per the statement of P.W-Amir who received
injuries during the incident, it was Shehzad who had fired upon Asghar Hayat
Constable. Besides, in the F.I.R. Shehzad was named as an accused and
responsible for commission of the offence. Undoubtedly, in such-like cases, it
is said that accused has made out a case of further inquiry. In view of the
law laid down by this Court in the case of Asmatullah Khan v Bazi Khan and
another (PLD 1988 SC 621) merely for such reason accused would not be entitled for
grant of bail because mere possibility of further inquiry which exists almost
in every criminal case, is no ground for treating the matter as one under
section 497(2), Cr.P.C . After having gone through the statement of P.W.
Amir and taking into consideration the material on record, we are of the
opinion that respondent No.2 was not entitled for grant of bail on the ground
of further inquiry because there is overwhelming evidence against him to prima
facie connect him with the commission of crime. Therefore, learned High Court
while granting bail to respondent No.2 had not exercised its jurisdiction
properly keeping in view the principle laid down by this Court in the case of
Asmatullah Khan (ibid).” (italics added)
 
 
60.       On the
point of further inquiry the relevant portion from the case of HAZURDAD v.
SAJID KHAN (1998 P.Cr.L.J. 633) reads as under:-
 
“7.  it is now
well-settled that a case would only fall, within the scope of further inquiry,
under section 497, Cr.P.C. if the Court reaches a conclusion that on the
material before it there are no reasonable grounds for believing that the
accused is guilty of a non-bailable offence punishable with death, imprisonment
for life or 10 years. In other words, in the absence of a finding to this
effect there would be no occasion to hold that the case is that of further
inquiry.” 
 
61.       Again
on the point of further inquiry the relevant portion from the case of ABDULLAH
SHAH v. STATE (2002 P.CR.L.J. 1387) reads as under:-
 
“I may observe here
that every hypothetical question which may creep into the mind and which could
be resolved only after recording the evidence and during the trial would not
make the case that of further inquiry. The case of further inquiry would only
be made out when the data collected by the prosecution is not sufficient to
provide reasonable grounds for believing that a prima facie case existed
against the petitioner.”
 
 
62.       In our
view, based on the above definition of reasonable grounds/prima facie case, through
a tentative review of the various S.161 statements and other documents, relied
upon, the prosecution has been able to establish a nexus between the applicants
and www.clickpk.net, which was the
illegal website, which was allegedly used in order to carry out this forex scam
and has thus made out a prima facie case against the applicants.
 
63.       This
nexus can in particular be seen through the alleged close inter relations/connections
between the directors/shareholders and family of KKI and Kalsoft which was the
company allegedly used to purchase the equipment used to create the website
which enabled the illegal parallel banking system to be carried out allegedly side
by side in the same office as the legal business of money changers. In this
respect corroboration was provided by the Section 161 statements and it was
significant that a large part of the evidence had been seized after it had allegedly
been moved (presumably to hide it) from KKI’s head office to the vaults of
another sister company of KKI named Kalia Security Vault Corporation. In our
view this is not a case of further inquiry which as indicated above could be
stretched to apply to nearly all bail cases under the proviso to Section 497(2)
Cr.P.C. The allegations against the applicants based on the documents on the
Special Courts file are   certainly not groundless. 
 
64.       In
particular, the relationship between the applicants in KKI and Kalsoft, as
alleged by the State, in terms of family relations, directorships and
shareholdings are especially revealing, as indicated in the table, provided by
the State, which is setout below:-
 
Names & Relation of
“Directors” between M/s Khanani & Kalia International (Pvt.) Limited (KKI),
accused company and its Sister Concern M/s Kalsoft (Pvt.) Limited (Kalsoft),
who prepared and installed legal Website “Remitton” and its Replica i.e.
illegal Website “Clickpk”, side by side in same Server Room/Office of KKI in
Saima Trade Tower, I.I. Chundrigar Road, Karachi.
 
M/s Khanani & Kalia
International (Pvt.) Limited (Accused Company):
 



S #


Name of Director


Designation


Relation with
  Applicant/Accused 




1.


Muhammad Hanif S. Kalia


Director & Chairman


Self and Brother of
  applicant/accused Abdul Munaf Kalia




2.


Abdul Munaf Kalia


Director & Chief Executive


Self and Brother of
  applicant/accused Muhammad Hanif S. Kalia




3.


Muhammad Javed Khanani


Director


            Self




4.


Muhammad Iqbal Kasbati


Director Finance


         Absconder



 
 
 
M/s Kalsoft (Pvt.) Limited:
 



S #


Name of Director


Designation


Relation with
  Applicant/Accused 




1.


Khurram Hanif S. Kalia


Director & Chief Executive


Son of accused Muhammad
  Hanif S. Kalia and Nephew of accused Abdul Munaf Khan




2.


Owais S. Kalia


Director 


Brother of accused
  Muhammad Hanif S. Kalia and Abdul Munaf




3.


Sikandar S. Kalia


Director


                 -do-



 
 
Names and Relation of Share
Holders between accused Company M/s Khanani & Kalia International (Pvt.)
Limited (KKI) and its Sister Concern M/s Kalsoft (Pvt.) Limited (Kalsoft), who
prepared and installed legal Website “Remitton” and its Replica i.e. illegal
Website “Clickpk” side by side in same Server Room/Office of KKI in Saima Trade
Tower, I.I. Chundrigar Road, Karachi.
 



S #


Name of Share Holder


Relation with
  Applicant/Accused


No. of Shares in “KKI”


No. of Shares in “Kalsoft”




1.


M. Hanif S. Kalia


Self & Brother of
  Applicant Abdul Munaf Kalia


162,500


65,000




2.


Muhammad Owais S. Kalia


Brother of applicant M. Hanif
  S. Kalia & Abdul Munaf Kalia


100,000


65,000




3.


Khurram Hanif Kalia


Son of applicant M. Hanif S.
  Kalia


87,500


73,500




4.


Mrs. Mumtaz Hanif S. Kalia


Wife of applicant M. Hanif
  S. Kalia


156,250


36,000




5.


Muhammad Sikandar S. Kalia


Brother of applicant M. Hanif
  S. Kalia and Abdul Munaf Kalia


100,000


65,000




6.


Mrs. Fouzia Owais Kalia


Wife of Owais S. Kalia


120,750


36,000




7.


Abdul Munaf S. Kalia


Self (Applicant)


156,250


65,000




8.


M. Iqbal Kasbati


Absconder


18,750


22,500




9.


Mrs. Afshan Sikandar Kalia


Wife of Sikandar S. Kalia


191,750


36,000




10.


Mrs. Naila Munaf Kalia


Wife of applicant Munaf S.
  Kalia


156,250


36,000




11.


Muhammad Javed Khahani


Self & brother of
  absconding accused Altaf S. Khanani


312,500


     ---




12.


Altaf S. Khanani


Absconding accused and Brother
  of applicant Muhammad Javed Khanani


312,500


     ---




13.


Mrs. Azra Sultana


Wife of applicant
  Muhammad Javed Khanani


312,500


     ---




14.


Mrs. Shenila Altaf


Wife of absconding
  accused Altaf S. Khanani


312,500


     ---




                                                        
  Total


2,500,000*


500,000**



 
*          According to Form-A,
Annual Return of Company having Share Capital as on 20.10.2008 of M/s
Khanani & Kalia International (Pvt.) Limited is:
 



Authorized Share Capital




Type of Shares


No. of Shares


Amount


Face value




Ordinary Shares


5,000,000


500,000,000


100 each



 



Paid up Share Capital




Type of Shares


No. of Shares


Amount


Issue Price




Ordinary Shares


2,500,000


250,000,000


Rs.100 each



 
**        According to Form-A,
Annual Return of Company having Share Capital as on 31.10.2008 of M/s
Kalsoft Limited is:
 



Authorized Share Capital




Type of Shares


No. of Shares


Amount


Face value




Ordinary Shares


1,000,000


100,000,000


100 each



 



Paid up Share Capital




Type of Shares


No. of Shares


Amount


Issue Price




Ordinary Shares


500,000


50,000,000


Rs.100 each



 
 
65.       Furthermore,
this case can be regarded as a one of heinous nature as it not only involves
huge sums of money but and such offences, if proven, are against the interest
of Society.  In this respect we note that in such circumstances bail has even
been denied in bailable offences. Reliance is placed on the case of MUHAMMAD
ZARAT KHAN v. STATE (PLD 2007 Karachi 29), which reads at page 48, as under:-
                        
“The
Hon’ble Supreme Court observed that a distinction is to be made between an
offence which is committed by an individual like theft and an offence which is directed
against the society for a whole for the purpose of bail. In the former cases
practice to allow bail in cases not falling under prohibitory clause of section
497, Cr.P.C. in the absence of an exceptional circumstances may be followed,
but in the later category, the Courts should be strict in exercise of
discretion of bail. It was further held that the above category of offenders
belong to a distinct class and they qualify to be treated falling within a
exceptional circumstance of the nature warranting refusal of bail even where
maximum sentence is less than 10 years R.I. for the offence involved, provided
the Court is satisfied that prima facie, there is material on record to connect
the accused concerned with the commission of the offence involved.” 
 
66.       Although
this case is not strictly a corruption case, it nevertheless deprived the SBP (and
the Country) of potentially millions of US$ of foreign exchange and potentially
disturbed the already tenuous economic position of the country which was
indicated in the earlier referred to letter of the Governor of the SBP requesting
 the Ministry of Interior to investigate this type of case, and as such we are,
therefore, fortified by the findings in SHAMREZ KHAN v. STATE (NLR 1999 264),
relevant portion of which reads as under:-
 
“13.      From the
above discussion, prima facie a case is made out against the applicant wherein
huge amount has been misappropriated causing loss to the exchequer. It may be
added that corruption at this higher level has become so rampant in almost
every institution of the country and the wealth of the country has been
ruthlessly plundered due to which country is at the verge of an economic
collapse. It is high time to curb this evil in every nook of this society to
save the country from further economic disaster, therefore, the applicant does
not deserve any leniency. In this regard reliance is made to Sajjad Hussain v.
The State (PLD 1997 Karachi 165) wherein while dealing with a similar case it
was observed as under:-
 
“While following the
above principles it would also be relevant to consider that our nation is
overwhelmed with avalanche of corruption under whose weight it is being
relentlessly crushed. Man, philosophers have said, is born innocent, it is the
institutions of society that spoil him. Whatever the truth in the observation,
we seem to have institutionalized corruption. The bloody putrescence of the
virus oozes out of every pore of the body politic and every segment of national
life, be it government, politics, business, law, medicine, health or education.
The landmark judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court reported as Aljehad Trust
through Raeesul Mujahideen Habib-ul-Wahab-ul-Kheri and others v. The Federation
of Pakistan and others. (PLD 1996 SC 324) (popularly known as the Judges’ case)
has raised hopes that the Court will now play a significant role in 
eradicating corruption and other social evils. Therefore, it is humbly
submitted that in such a situation a more pragmatic approach than has been the
case so far on the part of the Courts is needed at the investigation as well as
bail stages of corruption cases, because if the Courts show almost motherly
leniency towards people accused of high corruption, then it would be impossible
to successfully investigate and help bringing the culprits to book or to check
the ever-increasing cancer of corruption.” (ialics added)
 
 
67.       On the
point of serious allegations of fraud and forgery which is directly on point in
this case reliance is placed on the case of MEHRBAN ALI v. STATE (2004 SCMR
229), relevant part reads as under:-
 
“After
having gone through the entire record we are of the considered view that very
serious allegations of fraud, forgery and extortion have been leveled which are
not without substance. The complainant has been allegedly deprived from
immovable property worth whereof runs into lacs on the basis of forgery and
fake documents allegedly prepared by the petitioner. There is no denying the
fact that power-of-attorney was executed in favour of the petitioner by the
complainant which was subsequently withdrawn for certain obvious reasons. A
careful scrutiny of the record is demonstrative of the fact that prime facie a
case is made out against the petitioner and the order impugned does not call
for any interference.”
 
 
68.       Furthermore,
where the offense is non bailable and not as of right the court needs to be
more cautious in granting bail. Reliance is placed on the case of FATIMA v. ABDUL MAJID (2004 YLR 400), which reads at page 405 as under:-
 
“…..in cases where
the prescribed punishment is ten years, life imprisonment or death, the Court
has to be very careful while granting bail to the accused. In such cases since
bail is not a matter of right, the Court has to give a definite conclusion that
the case is one of the further inquiry on the basis of which prima facie the
accused cannot be connected to the crime..”
 
 
OTHER
ARGUMENTS (bail as a punishment, benefit of doubt, newspaper cuttings, same
offenses)
 
69.       We
have no cavil with the settled proposition of criminal law, as contended by the
learned counsel for the applicants that bail cannot be used as a punishment and
that the benefit of doubt should be given to the applicants. However, we do not
consider in this case that bail has been denied as a punishment or that there
is any benefit of doubt which needs to be applied to applicants at this stage
since we are of the view that the prosecution have made out a prima facie case
against the applicants under Sections 420,467,471,477-A/34, PPC.
 
70.       With
regard to question of the State failing to rebut the newspaper reports, we
agree that if unless rebutted according to the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the
case of SUPDT. OF POICE v. MUHAMMAD LATIF (1988 SC 387), these stand proved,
however, based on the facts and circumstances of this particular case, we
consider that even if the newspaper reports are taken into account they do not show
that the prosecution have failed to establish a prima facie case. Furthermore,
it would be unreasonable to expect investigators to waste valuable time and
money to go each day through each and every newspaper in order to rebut every
minor detail of their investigation. Notably, in this case only one newspaper
cutting was brought to our attention. 
 
71.       With
regard to the question of the proposition that three similar offenses have been
charged under three different laws, the law carrying the lesser sentence should
apply for the purposes of bail, we do not consider the offenses as being the same.
This is because FERA, 1947 mainly relates to Forex, PECO, 1997 relates to
electronic crimes whilst Ordinance, 1984 relates to offenses in respect of Banks
all of which crimes are distinct. Furthermore, the cases cited by the applicant
on this point are all distinguishable on the basis that none of them involved
crimes against society and were not of such extreme gravity/scale. 
 
72.       Even
if it could be argued that all the offenses are of a similar nature we consider
it both unjust and absurd that for the heinous and serious nature of the
offenses charged in this case a maximum sentence of 2 years under FERA, 1947 would
apply. FERA was passed in 1947 when there was limited dealing in forex and the
forex/money markets in Pakistan were virtually non existent. Entities like
Stock Exchanges, Money Exchanges, Brokerage Houses were virtually unheard of.
White collar crime on the scale and sophistication as takes place today would
not have been contemplated by the authors of FERA, 1947.
 
73.       The
law must evolve to meet the needs of an ever changing and developing society.
It needs to be dynamic, not statistic. Although this matter does not relate to
the Constitution, we consider the citation below appropriate, as, in our view,
all laws, not just the Constitution, should evolve so as to be responsive to
the needs of an ever changing society and the Global environment which we now
live in. In the case of SHARAF FARIDI v. FED. OF ISLAMIC REPUB. OF PAKISTAN (PLD 1989 Karachi 404), at page 438 it was held as under:-
“The Constitution is
a living document which reflects the aims and aspirations, genius and genesis,
temper and thinking of the people. Here I would refer to a classifiable
observation of my Lord the Chief Justice Muhammad Haleem in Benazir Bhutto’s
case PLD 1988 SC 416 that “the Constitution is not merely an imprisonment of
the past, but is also alive to the unfolding of the future”. It is “law of the
Laws”.”
 
74.       Offenses
of such a serious nature (as in this case) having a huge impact on society as a
whole and in this case potentially destabilizing its already fragile economy,
in our view, would even otherwise qualify as an exception to the general
proposition that where similar offenses are charged in respect of more than one
act the lesser penalty must apply. In our view, the Court must in such cases
consider the maxim of the “punishment fitting the crime” and should consider
under which law to proceed and be used as a basis of granting bail keeping in
view the gravity of the offense and whether it is a crime against an individual
or society as a whole. 
 
75.       In
“Criminal Law” by Smith and Hogan (5th Ed) at Page 10 when dealing
with sentence/punishment to fit the crime it was stated as under:-
 
“While it is clear
that there is no single sentence which is normal for a particular category of
crime—for example—rape—there is certainly a “tariff” in the sense of a range
within which a sentence will be regarded as normal for that category and
outside of which it will be regarded as abnormal” 
 
76.       Would
the people of Pakistan expect or consider as normal a maximum sentence of only two
years in a case such as this were it proven against the applicants? In our view
the answer must be in the negative.
 
77.       Should
this case be proven against the applicants it would amount to a huge breach of
trust against not only the SBP but also the entire country. The applicants
through their company KKI were entrusted by the SBP to carry out their functions
in accordance with the law. Such a breach of trust would have been against the
very regulator i.e. SBP, of the banking industry in Pakistan. 
 
78.       It is
notable that, at this point in time, in other jurisdictions where fraud of such
magnitudes are taking place which involve a breach of trust in terms of
deterrence Courts are passing sentences to reflect the gravity of the crime.
For, example, in the recent USA fraud case (although far larger in monetary
value than this case, but not concerning a breach of trust against the State)
the accused, Mr. Bernard Madoff on conviction despite his old age was on 29th
June 2009 sentenced to 150 years in jail due to his massive breach of trust
against individual investors. Pakistan too, must move with the times in dealing
with white collar crimes of such gravity. 
 
79.       Such
conduct in our view must be deterred. It is notable that even in the case of MUHAMMED
ALI v. STATE (2008 P.Cr.L.J. 1360) which involved a much more minor matter in
illegally using other persons’ ATM cards it was stated as under:-
 
“Allegation against
the accused is of a serious nature, therefore, we agree with learned D.A.G that
to discourage the people having such tendencies they should not be released on
bail on technical grounds.”
 
80.       Based
on the facts and circumstances of this case, it would be wholly inappropriate
for the maximum sentence in FERA, 1947 to be used as a yardstick for granting
bail.
 
81.       In
addition, though not raised before us, it should also be borne in mind that
Altaf Khanani, the real brother of applicant No.3-Muhammad Javed Khanani, has
already absconded in this case, that the applicants have contacts in Dubai and
other countries, are wealthy and influential persons and faced with the gravity
of such charges and evidence against them they may also be inclined to abscond.
Furthermore, since some of the Section 161 statements have been recorded by
former employees the potential of the applicants interfering with witnesses and
even with documents which in many cases have been stored electronically cannot
be ruled out especially as it seems that the applicants had already attempted
to hide some of the incriminating documents at Kalia Security Vault Corporation

 
FINDINGS:
 
82.       At
this stage, we find it premature to interfere with the Impugned Order. In our
view the prosecution has made out a prima facie case against the applicants and
as such bail is denied to all the applicants. 
 
83.       We are,
however, mindful that the applicants have already spent about eight months in
custody and they have a concern that since this case involves a large number of
documents the trial may take a long time to complete.
 
84.       Since
the trial is being proceeded with under Ordinance, 1984, which, in its preamble,
stipulates for speedy trial of the offences, we would expect, in any event, that
the trial be proceeded with expeditiously. However, notwithstanding that fact
we direct the trial Court to: 
 
(i)                 
At the earliest opportunity deal with the question of admissibility of
documents.
 
(ii)               
To complete the trial of the applicants within six months from the date
of this order. 
 
85.       We
would like to make it clear that the above discussion and findings are only tentative
in nature and will not influence in any way the trial Court in reaching a just and
fair decision based on the evidence adduced at trial.
 
Criminal
Bail Application No.571 of 2009 is dismissed in the above terms.
 
Judge
 
 
Karachi,
Dated:
____.7.2009.                                                                            Judge



