







                  ORDER SHEET
      HIGH COURT OF SINDH, CIRCUIT COURT HYDERABAD.
CR. B. A. No.S-869
OF 2008. 
 
Hussain Waris. . . . .Versus. . . . . The State.
                         

Date      Order with
signature of Judge

 
06.01.2009. 
 
1.       FOR
ORDERS ON MA NO.3416 of 2008. 
2.       FOR
HEARING.
 
Mr. Mian Taj
Muhammad Kerio, Advocate for the applicant/accused.
 
Mr. Mukhtar
Ahmed Khanzada, State Counsel.
. . . .
 
This
order will dispose of bail application made on behalf of applicant/accused
Hussain Waris S/o Muhammad Rafique, who is detained in case/F.I.R No.179 of
2008, registered under Article 3/4 Prohibition (Enforcement of Hudood) Order,
1979, at Police Station Pinyari, Hyderabad. 
2.    Brief facts of the case are that on 24.9.2008 complainant/SHO Ahmed
Khan Awan lodged F.I.R. at aforesaid Police Station, stating therein that on
that day he left Police Station for patrolling alongwith other police personnel
after making entry No.22 in daily diary. That at about 1450 hours, during
patrolling, they reached at Mustafa Paro, where he received spy information
that two persons having in their possession Bhang, are available at/near the
bridge situated at Noorani Basti. In pursuance of that information complainant
and others went to the pointed place where they saw two persons present along
plastic bags. It is alleged that on seeing police party one person succeeded in
running away, whereas the other one was detained and the material kept in
plastic bags was taken into custody. On inquiry, the detained person disclosed
his name as Hussain Waris, the present applicant/accused. On checking of the
bags the material was found Bhang. S.H.O then sent plastic bags numbering 12,
through ASI Muhammad Tahir Chandio and PC Muhammad Akram for getting the same
weighed from Chauhan Kanta. On its weighing the recovered property was found at
8 mounds and 25 kilograms. On inquiry the apprehended accused disclosed that
the person who had succeeded in running away was Ashraf alias Baboo S/o
Muhammad Shafi. Then arrested accused alongwith recovered property was brought
at Police Station where this case was registered. It is stated that 10 gram
Bhang was separated on the spot at the time of observing the formalities as a
sample for sending to the Chemical Examiner. After completion of the
investigation, applicant/accused was challaned in the Court of competent
jurisdiction. Earlier bail applications made before trial Court as well as
before Sessions Court Hyderabad were dismissed, hence this bail application. 
3.    Heard advocate for applicant/accused and learned State Counsel. 
4.    The learned advocate for the applicant/accused submitted that the
case registered against the applicant/accused does not fall within the
prohibitory clause of Control of Narcotic Substances Act, as Bhang is not
indicated among the narcotic articles. That the Bhang is defined under the
Hudood Ordinance 1979, therefore, the case has rightly been registered against
the accused under Article 3/4 of Prohibition (Enforcement of Hudood) Order,
1979, in this regard he referred to 1998 P L D (Karachi) 187.  In that case the
recovery of Bhang was effected from the accused weighing 64 kilograms and the
accused was granted bail by the High Court. Learned Counsel for the
applicant/accused has further submitted that maximum punishment provided for
such like cases is up to 05 years and 30 strips, therefore, the case of the
applicant/accused does not fall within the prohibitory clause of Section 497
Cr.P.C. He further contended that though the case was registered about four
months back against the applicant/accused, but till date no report of the
Chemical Examiner has been received to indicate the nature of the alleged
recovered property from the possession of the applicant/accused. That in a
similar case when after period of five months of the registration of the case
no report of Chemical Examiner was received, the accused was granted bail by
the Honourable High Court, in this respect he referred to 2007 P.Cr.L.J 165.
That principle laid down in both the cases referred to by him are applicable to
the present case, therefore, under the principle laid down in the referred
cases, the applicant/accused is entitled to the grant of bail. He is presently
detained in jail and not required for any further investigation purpose.
Learned counsel therefore, requested for grant of bail to the applicant/accused.

5.    Learned State Counsel has conceded to the grant of bail to the
applicant/accused, mainly on the ground that the alleged offence does not fall
within the prohibitory clause of section 497 Cr.P.C, and furthermore the
applicant/accused at this stage, is not required for any further investigation.

6.    I have considered the contentions raised at bar and have also
perused the case papers, as well as the decided cases. 
7.    The recovery of Bhang effected from the possession of the
applicant/accused false under Article 3/4 of Prohibition (Enforcement of
Hudood) Order, 1979, for which maximum punishment provided is up to five years.
The applicant/accused is detained in custody for the last four months, but no
report from the Chemical Examiner is received to show the nature of the alleged
recovered property effected from the possession of the applicant/accused,
therefore, in these circumstances, I am of the opinion that applicant/accused
cannot be kept in custody for indefinite period, as a punishment, and a case
for bail, at this stage, has been made out, therefore, the bail application
under consideration is allowed, and the applicant/accused Hussain Waris be
released on bail on his furnishing surety in the sum of Rs.100,000/- (One Lac)
with P.R Bond in the like amount to the satisfaction of trial Court. 
      Bail application disposed of. 
 
                                                      J
U D G E



