







ORDER SHEET
IN THE HIGH COURT OF SINDH,
CIRCUIT COURT, LARKANA
Cr. Bail Appln. No.S-457    of 
2013



DATE OF HEARING


 
ORDER WITH SIGNATURE OF
  HON’BLE JUDGE. 



01.11.2013.
1.
For orders on office objection.
2. For hearing.
Mr.
Saleem Raza Jakhar, advocate for the applicants/accused. 
Mr.
Khadim Hussain Khooharo, Deputy Prosecutor General. 
                             -------------------
                   Through this
bail application, the applicants Rehmatullah and Muhammad Bachal, seek post
arrest bail in crime No.163/2013 of Police Station Ratodero, District Larkana,
under Sections 324, 337-A(i), 337-F(i), 114, 147, 148 and 149, PPC.  The
post-arrest bail application of the applicants/accused has been rejected by the
learned V-Additional Sessions Judge, Larkana vide order dated 25.9.2013, hence
this bail application. 
                   The brief
facts of the prosecution case for the disposal of this bail application are
that on 31.8.2013, complainant Ali Hassan appeared at Police Station Ratodero
and lodged the F.I.R, alleging therein that there was his some quarrel with his
cousin Abdullah over the matter of water and he was annoyed.  On the day of
incident, complainant alongwith his cousin Shah Muhammad and relatives Ali Jan
and Abdul Wahab were sitting in the Otaque, when at about 10.00 a.m., they saw
accused Abdullah armed with pistol, Rehmatullah with pistol, Muhammad Bachal
and Abdul Razak having lathies.  Out of them, accused Abdullah instigated to
the rest of the accused to kill the complainant party and on his instigation
Rehmatullah fired from his pistol, which hit to Abdul Wahab on his leg, accused
Abdullah fired from his pistol upon Ali Jan, which hit him on his left thigh. 
Remaining accused caused lathi blows to Abdul Wahab and Ali Jan, on which they
raised cries and then all the accused persons run away.  The complainant
brought the injured to police station and lodged the F.I.R of the incident. 
                   Learned
Counsel for the applicants/accused argued that the applicants are innocent and
they have falsely been implicated in this case.  All the witnesses cited in the
case are related to the complainant, therefore, false implication of the
applicants in this case cannot be ruled out.  He has further submitted that
there are counter-cases between the parties, as from the side of the applicant
Mst. Sazin has lodged F.I.R against the complainant party of this case,
therefore, it is yet to be determined at trial as to which party is aggressor,
till then the case of the applicants/accused requires further enquiry as
contemplated under Section 497(2), Cr.P.C.  He has further submitted that the
injuries attributed to present applicants have not been declared by the
medicolegal officer as dangerous and the injuries attributed to present
applicants are on non-vital part of the body of injured persons.  He has
further submitted that in counter-case being crime No.166/2013 of P.S Ratodero
the complainant party has been granted bail, therefore, the learned Counsel for
the applicants while relying upon the case law reported in 1998 SCMR 1845 and
2010 P.Cr.L.J 379, has prayed for grant of bail to the applicants/accused. 
                   Learned
D.P.G., has opposed the grant of bail to the applicants/accused, on the ground
that their names are appearing in the F.I.R and according to him they have
played active role in the commission of the offence.
                   Heard the
learned Counsel for the parties and perused the record. 
                   There is no
doubt that the names of the applicants are appearing in the F.I.R with
allegation that at the time of incident accused Rehmatullah was armed with
pistol, while accused Muhammad Bachal armed with lathi.  According to the
F.I.R, accused Rehmatullah fired at P.W Abdul Wahab, which hit him on his left
leg, which is admittedly a non-vital party of body, but accused Rehmatullah did
not repeat the fire, though the complainant party was completely at his mercy. 
It appears that accused Rehmatullah had no intention to kill Abdul Wahab.  The
injury attributed to this applicant has not been declared by the medicolegal
officer as dangerous.  The allegation against accused Muhammad Bachal is that
he alongwith other accused caused lathi blows to P.Ws Abdul Wahab and Ali Jan. 
The allegation against accused Muhammad Bachal appears to be general in
nature.  Even otherwise the injury attributed to Muhammad Bachal has also not
been declared as dangerous. 
                   From the
perusal of police papers it appears that there was some quarrel between the
complainant and his cousin Abdullah over the matter of water, as such, it
appears that the incident has occurred in spur of moment and due to this quarrel
both the parties have registered cases against each other.  From the record it
appears that in the counter case being crime No.166/2013 of PS Ratodero,
complainant party has been granted bail by the learned Additional Sessions
Judge, Ratodero.  
                   In my
tentative opinion, counter-version arising from the same incident, one given by
the complainant in F.I.R No.163/2013 of PS Ratodero and the other given in
F.I.R No.166/2013 of PS Ratodero lodged by the parties against each other are
covered for grant of bail on the ground of further enquiry as contemplated
under Section 497(2), Cr.P.C.  In such cases, normally bail is to be granted on
the ground of further enquiry for the reason that the question as to which
version is correct is to be decided by the trial Court.  In this case challan
has been submitted and the applicants are no more required for investigation. 
Further detention of the applicants in this case would not serve the purpose. 
As per challan-sheet, the present applicants/accused have been booked for the
offences, for which the punishment do not fall within the prohibitory clause of
Section 497, Cr.P.C except Section 324, PPC and the applicability of Section
324, P.P.C is to be determined at the time of trial, therefore, on this score
the applicants have made out a case for bail.  I, therefore, for the
aforementioned reasons admit the applicants/accused to bail upon their furnishing
solvent surety in the sum of Rs.25,000/- each and P.R bond in the like amount
to the satisfaction of the trial Court. 
                                                                                      
                                                                                                JUDGE   
 
 



