



O R D E R     S H E E T




O R D E R     S H E E T
IN THE HIGH COURT OF SINDH CIRCUIT
COURT LARKANA
Crl. Bail Appln. No.S-620      of 2009
 



Date 


Order with
  signature of the Judge 



 
1.    
For orders on
office objection.
2.    
For orders on M.A
No. 2007/2009
3.    
For hearing.
 
31.12.2009.
 
Mr.
Habibullah G. Ghori, advocate for the applicant.
Mr. 
Ali Raza Pathan, State counsel. 
Mr.
Kashif Noor Khan Pathan, advocate for complainant. 
                             ----------
Ahmed Ali Shaikh, J.   Through this application, applicant Rustam Jhatial seeks
post arrest bail in Crime No.34/2008, Police Station Badah, registered under
Section 17(4) of the Offences Against Property (Enforcement of Hudood)
Ordinance, 1979.  
                   The applicant
approached the trial Court, but his bail plea has been turned down by the trial
Court vide order, dated 5.8.2009.
                   The facts of
prosecution case, in brief, are that on 15.3.2008, at 7.30 p.m., complainant
Shahabuddin Junejo, his father Muhammad, relatives Ghulam Mustafa and Shahmeer,
while returning to their village from Badah, were intercepted by three
culprits, who were armed with pistols and two of the culprits were identified
on torch light to be Rustam Jhatial (applicant) and Barkat Jhatial, both
residents of Village Koro Jhatial, Taluka Dokri.   It is alleged that on
gunpoint Rustam Jhatial robbed cash Rs.2000/- from P.W Shahmir and Barkat
Jhatial snatched cash Rs.700/- from P.W Ghulam Mustafa and then all the three
culprits tried to rob complainant’s father Muhammad, but on resistance, offered
by him, all the three culprits made straight fires of pistols at him resulting
in causing his death.  The complainant after narrating the facts of incident to
his nekmard Qaimuddin Junejo lodged the F.I.R.
                   It is, inter alia,
contended that the F.I.R is belated by 19 hours and the source of
identification of the culprits is a torch light, which is a weak piece of
evidence.  It is further contended that the torch had not been produced by the
complainant and there is general allegation against all the three culprits,
hence it is yet to be seen that whose fire proved fatal and the P.Ws have given
some different story in their 161, Cr.P.C statements.   It is also contended
that there are no reasonable grounds to believe the applicant guilty of the
above offence.  It is lastly contended that the case of the applicant requires
further enquiry and he is entitled to the concession of bail.  In support of
his contentions, learned Counsel for the applicant has relied upon the cases of
Ali Nawaz versus The State (PLJ 1988 Cr.C (Karachi) 545, Ayyub versus
The State (1994 P.Cr.L.J. 1057), and Moula Bux versus The State
(2003 P.Cr.L.J. 394).
                   Conversely, learned
State Counsel assisted by Mr. Kashif Noor Khan Pathan, advocate for
complainant, have opposed the bail application on the grounds that name of the
applicant finds place in the F.I.R and he has been implicated by the P.Ws in
their 161 and 164, Cr.P.C statements.  The applicant was duly armed with T.T.
Pistol and he alongwith co-accused had caused firearm injuries to deceased
Muhammad, who died at the spot.  There is recovery of T.T. Pistol from the
applicant, hence he is not entitled for the concession of bail.
                   Heard learned
Counsel for the parties and perused the material placed on record.
                   No doubt, the F.I.R
is belated by 19 hours, but the plausible explanation has been given by the
complainant in this regard.  On tentative assessment of the material available
on record, the applicant and co-accused appear to be responsible for committing
murder of deceased by causing him firearm injuries.  Besides, they robbed the
P.Ws.  There is recovery of pistol from the applicant.  The medical evidence
corroborates the ocular version.  Moreover, the applicant and the complainant
both are residents of same taluka and the name of the applicant finds place in
the F.I.R with his parentage and full address of residence, therefore, question
of mistaken identity is out of consideration.
                   No doubt, the
benefit arising from the delay in lodging the F.I.R goes to the accused, which
can also be taken into consideration alongwith other circumstances in the case
at the stage of bail application, but delay in lodging the F.I.R alone is never
considered a circumstance sufficient for grant of bail in a case involving
capital punishment as held by Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Haji Gul Khan
versus Gul Daraz Khan and others (1995 SCMR 1765).  So far the contention of
learned Counsel for the applicant that there is general allegation against all
the three accused in respect of firing at the deceased and it is yet to be
determined whether the fire made by the present applicant hit the deceased is
concerned, same merits no consideration at this stage.  In the case of Haji
Gulu Khan (supra), Hon’ble Supreme Court while cancelling the bail granted
to the accused by the High Court has held as under :-
          “Accused and his companions
had alleged fired shots from their pistols at the deceased as a result whereof
he fell down and died.  At such stage it was wholly immaterial as to whose shot
proved fatal.  Deceased according to medical evidence had received three
firearm wounds of entry.  Two empties recovered from the spot were found to
have been fired from the licensed pistol of the accused.  On tentative
assessment of evidence it was not possible to hold that no reasonable grounds
existed for believing that the accused had been guilty of the offence which was
punishable with death or imprisonment for life.”
 
                   With the profound
respects and regard, the law relied upon by the learned Counsel for the
applicant is not helpful to the accused for grant of bail, inasmuch as the
cases of Ali Nawaz and Ayyub (supra) were at the stage of appeal, while
in the case of Moula Bux (supra), the facts and circumstances were quite
different.
 
                   In view of above and
the dictum laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Haji Gulu Khan’s case
(supra), I am of the considered view that there is sufficient material to
connect the applicant with the commission of the offence as prima facie case
exists against the applicant which does not entitle him to the concession of
bail. 
          Consequently, I find no
substance in this bail application which is hereby dismissed.
 
          
                                                                             JUDGE  
      
                     
 
 



