



ORDER SHEET




ORDER SHEET
IN
THE HIGH COURT OF SINDH, BENCH AT SUKKUR
 
 
 
Cr. B.A No.
S-167 of 2012.
 
 
Zulfiqar
Ali Jatoi…...…..…….…….……….…….….Applicant
 
 
Versus
 
 
The
State….………………….…………….………..Respondent
 
                        
Mr. Ghulam
Shabir Dayo, Advocate for the Applicant.
 
Mr. Zulfiqar
Ali Jatoi, D.P.G. for the State.
        
Date
of hearing: 24th May, 2012.
                        
******************
                                
Muhammad
Ali Mazhar J., The applicant has applied post-arrest
bail in Crime No.18 of 2010 lodged at Police Station, Abad, Sukkur under
Sections 302, 342,         337-H (ii) & 34 PPC.
 
2.
Succinctly, facts of  the prosecution case are that on 9.2.2010, complainant
Azizullah Jatoi lodged the FIR that he is Govt. servant and deceased Muhammad
Shoaib was his younger brother. On 8.2.2010, when complainant returned from his
duty, he was told that children of Zulfiqar Ali had quarreled with their
children. Complainant along with his brother Shoaib went to the house of
Zulfiqar Ali for complaining the matter on which accused Zulfiqar Ali, Sikandar
Ali, Maqsood and their servant Ghulam Murtaza came out. Accused Zulfiqar Ali
having a repeater and Sikandar Ali having a pistol. Accused dragged his brother
Muhammad Shoaib by his arms and accused Zulfiqar Ali with his repeater made a
straight fire upon Shoaib to kill him. Sikandar made aerial firing. Complainant
raised cries which attracted Nisar Ahmed and Ahsanullah who also came. Seeing
them, all accused went away. The complainant saw that Shoaib sustained fire arm
injuries at the left side of abdomen, blood was oozing and he was found dead. 
 
3.
The applicant applied for bail but the same was dismissed by learned trial
court. Thereafter, he moved bail application in this court which was also
dismissed vide order dated 2.6.2011 with the directions to the learned trial
court to record the evidence of material witnesses within a period of six
months and thereafter the applicant shall be at liberty to move a fresh bail
application. The applicant moved bail application in the trial court on the
ground of statutory delay so also on medical ground, but the same was dismissed
vide order dated 21.2.2012.
                                    
4.
The learned counsel for the applicant argued that the FIR in question was
lodged on 09.02.2010 and the applicant was arrested on 24.02.2010 and after a
long delay, charge-sheet was submitted on 24.08.2010 despite this protracted
trial, the trial could not be concluded and the applicant is behind the bar for
the last more than two years. He further argued that the applicant is a patient
of Hepatitis-C and his proper treatment is not possible in the jail premises,
hence he is entitled to be released on bail not only on the ground of statutory
delay but also on medical ground. He further argued that no delay has been
caused by the applicant to the trial and in fact it was the complainant who
became instrumental in the delay and in order to prolong and drag the trial, he
filed an application under Section 193, Cr.P.C. for implicating other accused
persons and this application remained pending for a long time and thereafter
the complainant simply not pressed this application, which shows his mala fide
intention and ulterior motive that he wants to drag the proceedings so that the
applicant shall remain behind the bar for an unlimited period. In support of
his arguments, the learned counsel relied upon the following case law:-
 
1.  2012 SCMR 354
(Shabeer v. State). In
this case, the hon’ble Supreme Court considered the amendment made under
Section 497, Cr.P.C., whereby the right to seek bail on statutory ground was
restored. The hon’ble Supreme Court observed that accused was arrested on
14.11.2007 and since then he had been in custody. Despite framing of charge on
29.07.2008, no proceedings had been concluded nor there was any reasonable
possibility of conclusion of trial in near future, hence the applicant in that
case was granted bail.
 
 
2.  2012 SCMR 552
(Muhammad Jameel Rahi v. D.G. NAB and others). In this case also, the
question of delay was considered and it was held that the accused was behind
the bars for last more than 28 months  and during that period, out of 416
prosecution witnesses only 150 witnesses had been examined and conclusion of
trial in near future was not in sight. Nothing was available on record to
indicate that accused was in any manner, responsible for the delay nor it had
been alleged by prosecution, therefore, in this case also bail was allowed.
 
 
3.  2011 P.Cr.L.J.
1910 (Taj Muhammad v. State). In this case also the ground of
statutory delay was considered and the learned single Judge of this Court
observed that case came up for hearing on so many occasions, but was not
proceeded for hearing for one reason or the other, primarily because either
accused persons were not produced or the court was vacant or there was strike.
On majority of dates, the case could not proceed for no fault of accused or
their counsel, therefore in the above circumstances, the accused was granted
bail.
 
4.  2000 SCMR 212
(Abbas v. The State).
In this case, the bail was granted on medical ground. A report was called about
the health of accused and according to the report, he was suffering from
Hepatitis-C Virus but the learned High Court did not consider him entitled to
bail as in the opinion of medical board though the disease of the accused was
infectious but it did not spread or infect others by causal contract. The hon’ble
Supreme Court converted petition into appeal and observed that in view of the
serious nature of ailment the petitioner was suffering from, he was admitted to
bail to the satisfaction of the trial court.
 
 
 
5.
On the other hand, the learned DPG argued that the delay was caused by the
applicant as mostly the adjournment was sought by him or his Advocate. He
further argued that so far as the disease of Hepatitis-C is concerned, this can
be treated in the jail premises and the applicant is not entitled to be
enlarged on bail. He further submits that though directions were given by this
Court earlier on 02.06.2011 in Cr.Bail Application No.659/2010, whereby the
bail application was dismissed with direction to the trial court to record the evidence
of the material witnesses within a period of six months but the learned DPG
submits that despite this direction not a single witness has been examined so
far for which also he held the applicant responsible.
 
6.
I have examined the case diaries submitted by learned counsel for the applicant
in support of this application. It is a fact that applicant was arrested on
24.02.2010 and after a long delay, the charge-sheet was submitted on
24.08.2010, almost after lapse of six months. On 06.02.2010, the complainant
moved an application under Section 193, Cr.P.C. for joining two more persons
Sikandar and Maqsood, who were let off by the police and shown in Column No.2
of challan. On 13.03.2010, notice was issued to the proposed accused on this
application. After almost 15 dates, the aforesaid application was dismissed for
non-prosecution on 18.09.2010 by the trial court. 
 
7.
After passing almost 18 dates, fresh application was filed by the complainant
under Section 193, Cr.P.C. on 20.07.2011, on which again, a notice was issued
to the proposed accused which application remained pending for almost 13 dates
and on 27.10.2011, the complainant did not press this application, which was
dismissed by the trial court as not pressed. During pendency of aforesaid applications
no progress was made in the trial and even no attempt was made to frame the
charge.
 
8.
On 01.11.2011, the charge was framed.  It is clear from the aforesaid record
that due to pendency of application under Section 193, Cr.P.C., the trial court
failed to proceed and even after dismissal of earlier application under section
193, Cr.P.C., the same complainant repeated fresh application which also
remained pending for a considerable period of time and thereafter it was
dismissed as not pressed. The delay consumed in the trial due to pendency of
above application cannot be attributed to the applicant as due to pendency of
above application, the trial court on its own not proceeding the case. I have
further observed that almost 13 times, the applicant was not produced by the
jail authorities in the court and this delay also cannot be attributed to the
present applicant as he had no control if jail authorities failed to produce
him as under trial prisoner in court. On few dates, the case was adjourned due to
holidays and presiding officer was on leave but fact remains that despite
numerous dates not a single witness has been examined and the directions given
by this court in the earlier bail application became redundant due to non recording
of evidence of material witnesses. It is also a matter of record that few dates
were sought by the applicant but the entire delay cannot be attributed to the
applicant. I am fortified by the dictum laid down by the hon’ble Supreme Court
in the case of Shabeer (supra) wherein in the similar circumstances, the
hon’ble Supreme court granted bail to the applicant on the ground of statutory
delay and held that despite framing charge on 29.07.2008, no proceedings have
been concluded nor there is any reasonable possibility of conclusion of the
trial in near future. In the case of Muhammad Jameel Rahi (supra), again the
hon’ble Apex Court granted bail and held that nothing is available on record to
indicate that accused was in any manner responsible for the delay.
 
9. It is not the case
of prosecution that the present applicant is previously convicted or desperate
or hardened criminal as nothing has been alleged or argued in this regard. It
is also a fact that vide order dated 10.05.2012, the applicant was referred to
the Medical Superintendent GMC, Sukkur for medical examination and opinion. The
report dated 18.05.2012 shows that he was referred to for some investigation with
the direction to approach to the Director General Health Services Sindh at
Hyderabad. Letter of Medical Superintendent, GMC Hospital Sukkur dated
18.05.2012 is available on record. The counsel for the applicant has submitted
the report of Civil Hospital, Mirpurkhas which shows that the sample was
collected on the reference of Ghulam Muhammad Mehar Medical Hospital, Sukkur and
according to the report “Hepatitis-C Virus RNA” has been detected. Since report
clearly shows that the applicant is a patient of Hepatitis-C and this report
also showing the reference of Ghulam Muhammad Mehar Medical College Hospital
Sukkur, therefore it is clear that no further medical board is required when “Hepatitis-C
Virus RNA” is already detected. This report was not opposed or objected by the
learned DPG. In the similar circumstances, the hon’ble Supreme Court in the
case of Abbas (supra) granted bail to the accused who was also a patient of
Hepatitis-C. According to the website www.wikipedia.org, Hepatitis C is an infectious
disease affecting primarily the liver, caused by the hepatitis C virus
(HCV). The infection is often asymptomatic, but
chronic infection can lead to scarring of the liver and ultimately to cirrhosis, which is
generally apparent after many years. In some cases, those with cirrhosis will
go on to develop liver
failure, liver cancer or life-threatening esophageal.

 
 
10.
As a result of above discussion, I have reached to an irresistible conclusion
that the applicant is not only entitled to be released on bail on the ground of
statutory delay but also on medical ground in view of serious nature of ailment.
Consequently, this bail application is allowed. The applicant is granted bail
subject to furnishing solvent surety in the sum of Rs.3,00,000/- (Rupees Three
Lacs Only) with PR bond in the like amount to the satisfaction of the trial
court. Since it is an old matter, the learned trial court is directed to conclude
the trial preferably within a period of four months.
 
Dated
4.6.2012                                              Judge



