



Petitioner present in person




ORDER SHEET
IN THE HIGH COURT OF SINDH, KARACHI
Cr. Bail Application No. 8      of 2013
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Date                                         Order
with signature of Judge                                                                                 
 
FOR HEARING.
Notice issued to Investigating
Officer for 11.9.2013.
 
11th September, 2013.
 
Mr. Rana
Shamshad Khan, Advocate for applicant. 
 
Mr. Abdullah
Rajput, Assistant Prosecutor General,
Sindh a/w SI
Raja Tariq Mehmood of CID.
 
>>>>>>>
<<<<<<<
 
SYED MUHAMMAD
FAROOQ SHAH, J.:- The applicant presently confined in central prison
Karachi has sought bail in Crime No. 3  /2013 registered under section 5/4,
Explosive Substance Act, 1908 at Police Station CID, Sindh Karachi. 
 
2.                     Brief
facts of the case are that on 25.4.2013 at about 2200 hours, the complainant SI
Muhammad Khalid deputed in CID Sindh, Karachi lodged FIR alleging therein that
he arrested the present applicant, in whose possession 10 Kgs explosive
substance was recovered. The bail application moved earlier by the applicant
before the trial court was declined by order dated 25.6.2013. Hence the present
application.
 
3.                     Learned
counsel for the applicant submits that the applicant has falsely been involved
in this case as there is no direct or indirect evidence available against the
applicant. Per learned counsel all the mashirs are police officials; that under
section 7 of the Explosive Substance Act, the necessary permission as required
under the law has not been obtained for submission of challan against accused; that
as per contents of FIR, the alleged explosive was recovered on 25.4.2013 on
pointation of applicant who was already in custody in some other case; that the
alleged recovered material was dispatched to Bomb Disposal Unit, Special Branch
on 07.5.2013 after the delay of about 12 days, without any reason or cause. In
support of his submissions learned counsel placed reliance upon the cases of
Ali Sher & others V/S THE STATE (2008 SCMR 707) and Khalid Khan V/S THE
STATE (2012 MLD 828).
 
4.                     On
the other hand, learned Assistant Prosecutor General, Sindh has submitted that
FSL report is not available in the police papers. He further contended that
punishment provided under section 5 of the Explosive Substance Act is 14 years
hence the case falls within prohibitory clause of section 497 Cr.P.C. 
 
5.                     Heard
the learned counsel for the applicant, learned A.P.G.  and also perused the
record. 
 
6.                     With
the assistance of learned Assistant Prosecutor General, Sindh and the
Investigating Officer, I have examined the inspection report wherein one ASI
Khizar Hayat of Bomb disposal Unit Special Branch, Karachi has stated that
recovered material is commonly used for commercial purposes and easily
available in the market. He has further mentioned that two samples of recovered
explosive/chemical material were handed over to Investigating Officer for lab
analysis for final observations. The Investigating Officer present in court submitted
that he did not dispatch the recovered material to the FSL or to any other
laboratory to analyze the nature of recovered material. 
 
7.                     Whatever
mentioned above, I reached at conclusion that admittedly the necessary
permission from the government has not been obtained for trial of the case
under section 7 of Explosive Substance Act. In the case of MUHAMMAD ASIF V/S
THE STATE (2006 P.Cr.L.J 1786) while grating the bail to the applicant, it was
observed that sanction/consent of Provincial Government as required under
section 7 of Explosive Substances Act, 1908, was lacking and such deficiency in
the case of prosecution had made the case of further inquiry. In another case
reported as HABIBUR REHMAN V/S THE STATE (2012 YLR 665), while granting the
bail to the applicant it is held that:
“I have considered the submissions. The present 
applicant  was  arrested  on  12-5-2011 and the authority has not been able to
grant permission for prosecution as required by section 7 of the Explosive
Substances Act, 1908. In Muhammad Asif's case Hon'ble Mr. Justice Anwar Zaheer
Jamali acting as a Single Judge of this Court (as his lordship then was and now
his lordship graces the Supreme Court) has observed that non-availability of
sanction/ consent of the Provincial Government under section 7 of Explosive
Substances Act, 1908, makes the case of further enquiry.
In view of above, this application is allowed. The
applicant is ordered to be admitted to bail upon executing a P.R. bond for a
sum of Rs.100,000 with one surety in the like amount to the satisfaction of the
trial Court.”
 
8.                     Perusal
of the record transpires that the Bomb Disposal Unit, Special Branch reported
that the said recovered material is commonly used for commercial purposes and admittedly
the said material was not dispatched for lab analysis, as recommended by
concerned of Bomb disposal Unit. It appears that either Investigating Officer
destroyed the evidential value of such recovery or that police was not certain about
the nature of the substance and its use in any explosive device. Keeping in
view the dictum as laid down by this court in cases referred to above and the
fact that no independent witness of locality witnessed the recovery, more-so,
admittedly necessary permission has also not been obtained for trial of the
case under section 7 of Explosive Substance Act, I am of the opinion that all
these discrepancies make the case of applicant of further enquiry. 
 
9.                     In
view of the foregoing, bail application is accepted, resultantly the applicant
is admitted to bail subject to his furnishing surety in the sum of Rs.
1,00,000/- (Rupees one lac only) and P.R. Bond in the like amount to the
satisfaction of trial court.  
 
 
 
 
Aamir/PS                                                                                                     J
U D G E 



