IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
PESHAWAR.

(Judicial Department)

Cr.Misc (B A) No. 184-P/2017.
Date of hearing:.......... 3.4.2017

Petitioner (Sifat Ullah) by Muhammad Ijaz Sabi, Advocate.

Respondent (s) the State by Mian Arshad Jan, AAG.

SYED AFSAR SHAH, J.- Since identical question of law is

involved in the instant Cr. Mise (B.A) No. 184-P/2017, titled Sifat Ullah
vs. The State, Cr. Misc (BA) No. 165-P/2017, titled Khurshid Babar. Vs.
the State and Cr. Misc (BA) No. 315-P/2017, titled Shafiq ur Rehman vs.
The State, therefore, these are being disposed of by this single judgment.
2. Facts of the Cr. Misc:(BA) No. 184-P/2017 as spelt out from
the record are that on 11.5.2015, Fazal-i-Akbar SI Incharge, Police
Post, Turnab, alongwith police nafri was on gusht of the illaqa, when
got information about the transportation of narcotics from tribal
territory to Punjab in a motorcar No.AF-015 via G.T road and, hence,
in the backdrop, he started surveillance of the road, near jaghra chowk,
when, in the meanwhile, the vehicle already spotted to them emerged
from Peshawar side, which was signaled to stop. The inmates of the
car, on seeing the police nafri, accelerated its speed, however, on chase
it was brought to halt near to the orchard of Marakachorri. The inmates
of the vehicle tried to flee away in the nearby fields, but one of them
was apprehended and searched personally, which led to the recovery of
pistol from his immediate possession. The car was also subjected to a
thorough search, which led to the recovery of chars pukhta weighing 25
k.gs smartly concealed in its secrete cavities. On recovery of narcotics,

arrest of one of the accused (petitioner) and seizure of the vehicle, the
seizing officer prepared the recovery memo and recorded the murasilla,
which was dispatched to Police Station, Chamkani, where on the basis
of which FIR No. 484 dated 11.5.2015 was registered against the
petitioner and his co-accused under section 9 (c) CNSA besides other
penal sections. Later on, the petitioner applied for his post arrest bail,
which was dismissed upto this Court on merits. His petition for the
grant of bail on the ground of statutory delay was also dismissed by the
learned trial Court and, now, he has come to this Court for his release
on bail on the same ground (statutory delay).

3. In the case of accused Khurshid Babar, who is petitioner in
Cr. Mise (BA) No. 165-P/2017, Aftab Khan SI Incharge PP Turnab is
the seizing officer and on 8.1.2016, he alongwith police nafri had
fenced the G.T road opposite to the Police Post, when in the
meanwhile, a motorcar No. LEH 4642 was intercepted. The driver of
the vehicle, on query, disclosed his name as Khurshid Babar and on his
pointation, the seizing officer recovered heroin, weighing 05 k.gs,
concealed in its (car) cavities, whereafter, he prepared the seizure
memo and recorded the murasilla, which was dispatched to Police
Station, Chamkani, where on the basis of which FIR No.47 dated
8.1.2016 was registered against the accused under section 9 (¢c ) CNSA.
After his arrest, his request for the grant of bail was disallowed upto
this Court on merits. Again, he applied to the learned trial Court for his
release on bail on the ground of statutory delay, which was dismissed
and, now, he has come to this Court for the same relief.

4. Facts of Cr. Mise (BA) No. 315-P/2017 as reflected from the
record are that on 19.3.2015, he was found in trafficking of opium,
weighing 05 k.gs 200 grams, in a Car bearing registration No.BRB 325

and, hence, in the backdrop FIR No.341 dated 19.3.2015 was registered
against him in Police Station, Hayatabad, under section 9 (c) CNSA.
He was declined bail on merits upto this Court. His petition for the
grant of bail on statutory delay was also dismissed by the learned trial
Court and, now, he is before the Court seeking his release on bail on
the same ground, i.e., statutory delay.

5. The gist of the arguments of the learned counsel for the
petitioners, in all the cases, is that fair trial and its early disposal /
conclusion is the right of the petitioners as enshrined under Article 10-
A of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973, and
lesser punishment, as envisaged in the Section of law, they are charged
with, has to be taken into account while seizing of bail applications,
that too, when it is cardinal principle of criminal jurisprudence that an
accused person is presumed to be innocent till the time his guilt is
proved beyond reasonable doubt by the prosecution and since the
petitioners are behind the bars for the last more than one year, they are
entitled to be released on bail on statutory ground.

6. The main thrust of the arguments of the learned Additional
Advocate General appearing on behalf the State is that the petitioners
cannot claim bail on statutory ground in view of the bar contained
under Section 51 of the CNSA, 1997, which is not applicable in totality
in Section 497, Cr.PC and even otherwise, they have not yet completed
continues period of two years behind the bars, which is the basic
ingredient for asking bail on the statutory ground as the punishment for
the offence, they are charged with, is death, which is to be taken into
account even while hearing petitions for bail, as such, they have to
complete two years in jail and since these petitions, in the present
scenario, are pre-mature, therefore, are liable to be dismissed on this

score alone.
7. I have considered submissions of learned counsel for the
petitioners, learned AAG representing the State and gone through the
record of the case with their valuable assistance.

8. First this court will take up the applicability of the third proviso
to Section 497(1) Cr.P.C, in view of the bar contained in Section 51(1)
of the Control of Narcotic Substances Act, 1997. The above proposition
has been dealt with in a most lucid manner by the august Supreme
Court in the case of Gul Zaman vs. the State, reported in 1999 SCMR
1271, where it has unanimously been held by their lordship that despite
the bar contained in section 51 of the Act, ibid, bail can be granted to
an accused person charged for an offence under the Control of Narcotic
Substance Act, 1997. In the year 2000, the same legal proposition came
up before the Hon’ble Supreme Court in case titled the State through

Deputy Director Anti Narcotic Force Karachi vs. Mobeen Khan, 2000

SCMR_299. The august Supreme Court re-called the bail of the
respondent-accused mainly on the ground that two years had not been
expired from the date of his arrest as the accused-respondent was
charged under section 9 (c) CNS, Act, 1997, carrying punishment upto
death. The relevant observations of their lordship in the cited case are
reproduced below:-

As regards Mr. Motiani’s above second submission, it may be
observed that even if it is to be conceded for the sake of
argument that the application of the third proviso to subsection
(1) of Section 497 Cr.P.C, has not been excluded by subsection
(1) of the Act (which seems to be incorrect), since clause (c) of
section 9 of the Act, inter alia, carries sentence of death), the
statutory period of delay would be two years under clause (b)
of _the_above_third_proviso_to section 497 Cr.P.C_as

admittedly, in the above case the period of the two years had
not expired from the date of arrest (i.e., 4.2.1997) on 10.8.1998
when the bail was granted, and therefore, bail could not have

been granted on the ground of statutory delay. (Underline is
supplied for emphasis).

Again, in the case of Deputy Director ANF Karachi vs Syed

Abdul Qayum, reported in 2001 SCMR 14, which is later in time, the

Hon’able Supreme Court ruled that despite the provisions contained in
Section 51 of the Control of Narcotic Substances Act, 1997, the
Sessions Court and High Court have the power to grant bail. For the
sake of convenience and ready reference, the relevant part of the
judgment is given below:-

“Moreover, this Court in the case of Gul Zaman V the State
reported in 1999 SCMR 1271, has elaborately dealt with the
application of sections 496, 497 and 498 Cr.P.C. in view of
the bar contained in section 51 of the Act and it has been
unanimously held that despite the provisions contained in
section 51 of the Act, the Sessions Court and High Court
have the power to grant bail.”

In view of the above, the arguments of the learned AAG
that the third proviso of Section 497(1) Cr.P.C, in view of the bar
contained in Section 51 (1) of CNSA is not applicable, are without any

substance.
9. Now, I may take up the ground of statutory delay but

before that it will be more appropriate to reproduce provisos third and
fourth to Section 497 Cr.P.C and section 9 of CNSA, which run as
under:-

“AIT. cicecccccccececcccecsscecescececesseseseess

PHOVIAEd .o. oee cee cee cok cee tee cee te ee cee tees

PHOVIAEd .. ee cee cee cee ee te cee cee tee tee tates

Provided further that the Court shall, except where it is of

the opinion that the delay in the trial of the accused has
been occasioned by an act or omission of the accused or any
other person acting on his behalf, direct that any person
shall be released on bail.

(a) Who, being accused of any offence not punishable with
death, has been detained for such offence for a continuous
period exceeding one year or in case of a woman exceeding
six months and whose trial for such offence has not
concluded; or

(b) Who, being accused of an offence punishable with death,
has been detained for such offence for a continuous period
exceeding two years and in case of a woman exceeding one
year and whose trial for such offence has not concluded.

Provided, further that the provisions of the foregoing
proviso shall not apply to be previously convicted offender
for an offence punishable with death or imprisonment for
life or to a person who, in the opinion of the Court, is a
hardened, desperate or dangerous criminal or is accused of
an act of terrorism punishable with death or imprisonment

for life.

A bare perusal of the above quoted third proviso would show
that the Court is obliged to release a person on bail, who, being accused
of an offence not punishable with death, if he has been detained for
such an offence for a continuous period exceeding one year and whose
trial for such offence has not been concluded. Similarly, under clause
(b) of above proviso, the Court is obliged to release a person, who,
being accused of an offence punishable with death, if he has been
detained for such offence for a continuous period exceeding two years
and whose trial for such offence has not been concluded. However, this
is subject to the condition provided in the above third proviso, i.e, the
delay in the trial of the accused should not have occasioned by any act
or omission of the accused or any other person acting on his behalf,
while, fourth proviso provides a further rider on the above statutory
right of an accused person to bail on the above ground of statutory
delay by laying down that the third proviso to above subsection shall
not apply to a previously convicted offender for an offence punishable
with death or imprisonment for life or a person who in the opinion of
the Court is a hardened, desperate or dangerous criminal or involved in

terrorism.
Simple is that the right of an accused to be enlarged on
bail under the proviso, referred to ibid, is a statutory right which cannot
be denied under the discretionary power of the Court to grant bail,
however, if the case falls under the fourth proviso, bail can be refused

by the Court.

9. Punishment for contravention of section 6,7 and 8.--- whoever
contravenes the provisions of sections 6,7 and 8 shall be
punishable with:-
(a) Imprisonment which may extend to two years, or with fine, or
with both, if the quantity of the narcotic drug, psychotropic
substance or controlled substance is ten grams or less;

(b) Imprisonment which may extend to seven years and shall also
be liable to fine, if the quantity of the narcotic drug,
psychotropic substance or controlled substance exceeds
one hundred grams but does not exceed one kilogram;

(c) Death, or imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for a term
which may extend to fourteen years and shall also be liable
to fine which may be upto one million rupees, if the quantity
of narcotics drug, psychotropic substance or controlled
substance exceeds the limits specified in clause (b);

Provided that, if the quantity exceeds ten kilograms _ the
punishment shall not be less than imprisonment for life.

From the above reproduction, intent and scheme of the
legislator is quite clear about the quantum of prescribed punishment
under section 9 (c) (ibid), which could either be death or imprisonment
for life or an imprisonment for a term which may extend to fourteen

years, in addition to fine upto one million rupees.

10. Regarding the arguments of learned counsel for the petitioners
that while seizing of bail application, court should not keep in mind
maximum punishment prescribed for offence but should consider
sentence which is likely to be awarded, suffice it to say that it is not a
legal requirement because under section 497 Cr.P.C, which contains
prohibitory clause, is with regard to punishment prescribed and not

punishment, which is likely to be awarded. Moreover, the question of
categorization of sentences has already been resolved/attended by the

august Supreme Court in the case of Socha Gul vs. The State (2015

SCMR 1077).

11. Judged on the above touchstone, if one goes through the record
of the case, one could reach to the conclusion that in Cr. Misc (BA) No.
315-P/2017, petitioner-accused Shafiq ur Rehman has been arrested on
19.3.2015. His trial has not been concluded and so far as the delay of
two years in the conclusion of his trial is concerned, as is evident from
the record, it is not attributed to him and, hence, is entitled to be
released on bail on the ground of statutory delay, moreso, when no
evidence is forthcoming on record which could show that his case falls
within the ambit of fourth proviso, referred to earlier. Such being the
position, Cr. Misc (BA) No. 315-P/2017 is allowed, resultantly,
petitioner Shafiq ur Rehman is admitted to bail on furnishing bail bonds
amounting to Rs. 1,00,000/- with two sureties each in the like amount

to the satisfaction of learned trial Court.

12. In Cr. Misc (B.A) No. 184-P/2017, titled Sifat Ullah vs. The
State and Cr. Misc (BA) No. 165-P/2017, titled Khurshid Babar. Vs.
the State, none of the accused had earned the ground of statutory delay
of two years in the conclusion of their trial and when so, both the
petitions being premature stand dismissed with the direction to the
learned trial Court to conclude the trial of the accused expeditiously,
without any further delay. Office is directed to send record of the cases

to the learned trial Court forthwith.

Announced: JUDGE
11.4.2017

*M.Zafral*
