JUDGMENT SHEET
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,

D.LKHAN BENCH
(Judicial Department)

Cr.A.No.25-D/2012

Allah Wasaya and another
Versus

The State and another
JUDGMENT
Date ofhearing: 03.4.2018.
Appellants: Appellant Allah Wasaya_ by) Mr.
Ghulam Hur Khan _ Baloch

Advocate.

Respondents: State__b Mr. Kamran_ Hayat

Miankhel, Addl: A.G. and

(respondent No.2 by) Mr. Saif-ur-
Rahman Khan Advocate.
2K

ISHTIAQ IBRAHIM, J.- Through this single

judgment we propose to decide this appeal i.e
Cr.A.No.25-D/2012 (Allah Wasaya and another Vs.
The State and another) and Cr.R.No.11-D/2012
(Zulfiqar Vs. Allah Wasaya and 02 others) being the
outcome of one and the same judgment dated
15.5.2012, rendered by learned Additional Sessions
Judge-V, D.JI-Khan in case FIR No.240 dated

10.11.2010 registered under Sections 302/34 PPC at

Imran/* (D.B) Mr. Justice Ishtiag Ibrahim and Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad, JJ
Police Station Paroa, District D.I-Khan, whereby the
appellants Allah Wasaya and Ehsanullah were
convicted and sentenced as under:-

“Under Section 302(b) read with
Section 34 PPC to _ life
imprisonment and to pay
Rs.1,00,000/- (Rupees one lac)
each as compensation to the legal
heirs of the deceased under
Section 544-A Cr.PC, failing
which to undergo further six
months Rigorous Imprisonment.
However, benefit of Section 382-B
Cr.PC was extended to them.”
2. The appellants have filed Cr.A.No.25-
D/2012 for setting aside their conviction and sentence
while complainant/ respondent No.2 has filed
Cr.R.No.11-D/2012 for enhancement of sentence
awarded to the appellants.
3. The prosecution case as set forth in the
FIR (Ex.PA) is that on 10.11.2010 at 09:30 a.m.
complainant Zulfiqar (PW-5) reported the matter to the
police at Kacha path leading towards Middle School
Khana Sharif near the house of Amanullah that his

brother Hafizullah alias Fidu, employed as Peon in

Middle School Male, as usual was on his way to the

Imran/* (D.B) Mr. Justice Ishtiag Ibrahim and Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad, JJ
school alongwith handcart having plastic drums for
taking water while on the same way PW-5 was coming
from his house to the village. It was about 07:45 a.m.
when Hafizullah reached near the house of Amanullah
where accused Allah Wasaya, Sanaullah sons of Yasin
duly armed with Kalashnikovs and accused Ehsanullah
son of Koro armed with pistol were present and when
brother of the complainant reached near them, all the
three accused started firing at him with their respective
weapons, as a result he got hit and fell on the ground.
After the occurrence the accused decamped from the
spot. The complainant attended his brother who
succumbed to his injuries. Besides complainant, the
occurrence is stated to be witnessed by Khalil-ur-
Rahman, Asmatullah (PW-6) and Jehangir. Motive for
the occurrence is stated to be previous blood feud. The
report of the complainant was reduced in shape of
murasila Ex.PA/1 on the basis of which FIR (Ex.PA)
was registered.

4. After completion of investigation
complete challan was submitted against the accused in
the learned trial Court. Charge was framed against the
appellants to which they did not plead guilty and

claimed trial. In support of its case the prosecution

Imran/* (D.B) Mr. Justice Ishtiag Ibrahim and Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad, JJ
produced as many as 08 PWs. Complainant Zulfiqar
and Asmatullah furnished their ocular account PW-5
and PW-6 respectively while Dr. Abdul Rauf SMO
RHC Paroa was examined as PW-2 who conducted
postmortem examination on the dead body of the
deceased. Thereafter statements of appellants were
recorded under Section 342 Cr.PC, wherein they
professed innocence and false implication in the case.
They did not wish to be examined on Oath as required
under Section 340(2) Cr.PC. However, they produced
one Inayatullah as DW-1 in their defence. On
conclusion of trial, vide judgment dated 15.5.2012, the
learned Additional Sessions Judge-V, D.I.Khan
convicted and sentenced the appellant as referred
above, hence, the appeal and the revision.

5. During pendency of this appeal, on
29.7.2013 a group of miscreants attacked Central Jail,
D.I.Khan and the appellant Ehsanullah escaped/taken
away from the jail and till date his whereabouts are not
known. In this respect statement of Binyamin Khan,
Superintendent Central Jail, D.I-Khan was recorded on
30.10.2013. In such view of the matter, this appeal is

adjourned sine die to the extent of appellant Ehsanullah

Imran/* (D.B) Mr. Justice Ishtiag Ibrahim and Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad, JJ
which shall be relisted after his arrest on the application
of either side.

6. Learned counsel for the appellant
submitted that the complainant is a chance witness. He
has not established his presence at the spot at relevant
time. The occurrence took place at 07:45 a.m. while the
report was lodged at 09:30 a.m. to the police, that’s too
at the spot which shows that the preliminary
investigation was conducted and the complainant and
eyewitnesses were procured by the police. He
submitted that complainant (PW-5) is the brother of
deceased, why he was spared when there was enmity
between the parties. The appellant was not medically
examined before confessional statement and _ his
confessional statement is neither voluntary not true.
The Magistrate who recorded confessional statement of
the appellant was not conversant with Sairaiki as he
hails from Mardan. According to Investigating Officer
he took the appellant to the Judicial lock-ups after
confessional statement. FSL report is positive to the
extent of 02 empties while 04 empties have been
recovered from the place of occurrence. Moreso, the
Expert stated that two 7.62 MM bore empties were

fired from 44 bore weapon which is also misconception

Imran/* (D.B) Mr. Justice Ishtiag Ibrahim and Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad, JJ
and it appears to be manipulated on the part of
Investigating Officer,

7. On the other hand, learned Addl: A.G.
assisted by learned counsel for the complainant
submitted that after his arrest the appellant confessed
his guilt and his confessional statement was recorded
PW-7 Akbar Ali, Judicial Magistrate, D.I-Khan on the
very second day of his arrest i.e. 27.11.2010 which is
true and voluntary and the same alone can be made
basis for conviction; that the appellant is directly
charged in a promptly lodged with specific role of
firing; that the weapon of offence was recovered from
the spot and the FSL report regarding empties and
weapon of offence is in positive; that the prosecution
has proved its case through independent and confidence
inspiring ocular as well as circumstantial evidence; that
the learned trial Court has rightly appreciated the
material brought on record but erred in awarding lesser
punishment of life imprisonment to the appellant and
prayed for enhancement of normal penalty of death.

8. In this case occurrence took place on
10.11.2010 at 07:45 a.m. while the report was lodged at
the spot by the complainant Zulfiqar (PW-5), brother of

the deceased at 09:30 a.m. The report was delayed for

Imran/* (D.B) Mr. Justice Ishtiag Ibrahim and Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad, JJ
almost 01 hour and 45 minutes. During this period no
effort was made by the complainant or other witnesses
to shift the dead body to the hospital or to the police
station, which is situated at a distance which can be
travelled within half an hour from the spot. Had the
complainant (PW-5) and Asmatullah (PW-6) been
present on the spot and seen the occurrence they would
have immediately shifted the dead body to the hospital
or the concerned police station. Likewise, in column
No.3 of inquest report (ExPW-4/2), the time of
occurrence is mentioned as 10.11.2010 while no
specific time of the occurrence has been written and it
was left blank. When the case of the prosecution rests
on such FIR, which shows that it was lodged after
preliminary inquiry/investigation, it not only reacts on
the genuineness of the prosecution story but at the same
time creates doubts with regard to the presence of the
complainant and eyewitness at the time of occurrence.
Reliance is placed on the case of Musarat Bibi and
another Vs. The State (1992 P Cr.LJ 158, wherein it
was held as under:-

“For the reasons stated above the
case is not free from doubt and
from circumstances it is clear that

the case was registered after

Imran/* (D.B) Mr. Justice Ishtiag Ibrahim and Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad, JJ
deliberation and consultation and
investigation has not been done
honestly. I, accept the appeal and
acquit the appellants. They are in
custody. They shall be released
forthwith if not required in any
other case. In, view of acquittal the
notice for enhancement of sentence
stands vacated.”

9. Coming to the ocular account furnished by
complainant Zulfigar (PW-5) and Asmatullah (PW-6).
Keeping in view the above mentioned background of
the registration of the FIR their testimonies are to be
looked into with great care and caution being interested
and inimical witnesses. It is in the statement of the
complainant that “deceased was employed as Peon in
Middle School of village Khana _ Sharif. On
10.11.2010 at 07:45 he was coming from his house
having a wheel barrow. Accused Allah Wasaya and
Sanaullah armed with Kalashnikovs while accused
Ehsanullah who was armed with pistol were standing
beside the house of Amanullah barber. I was also
accompanying my brother and was by that time on the
eastern side of the Middle School. The accused started
firing at my brother. As a result of the firing,

Hafizullah got hit and fell down. It is not believable

Imran/* (D.B) Mr. Justice Ishtiag Ibrahim and Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad, JJ
and the same is also belied by the site plan Ex.PB. If
the complainant was present on the spot then having
equal degree of enmity with the accused party, how he
was spared. In addition to above, it has been elicited
from the mouth of this witness that he has not given the
purpose of his presence at the time of occurrence.
Likewise, he has also admitted in his cross-exanimation
that “I had not stated in my report Ex.PA/1 the
purpose of my being out of my house and
accompanying the deceased at the time of occurrence.
Similarly I had also not mentioned in my report
Ex.PA/I as to where I was proceeding to at that time.”
It is also important to note that in site plan neither the
house of the deceased nor that of the complainant has
been mentioned. We assume for a while that the
complainant was accompanying the deceased at the
time of occurrence, then in site plan he has been shown
at point No.2 while the deceased has been shown at
point No.1 and he was accompanying his brother
towards Middle School then according to the site plan
he has already crossed the accused and was at a
distance of 50 paces from the deceased when the
occurrence took place. It is the bounden duty of the

prosecution and most particularly in cases of inimical

Imran/* (D.B) Mr. Justice Ishtiag Ibrahim and Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad, JJ
-10-

witnesses that they have to prove the presence of the
PWs on the spot beyond the shadow of any reasonable
doubt and from the conduct of the complainant and
PWs and report at the spot led us to irresistible
conclusion that it was an unseen occurrence and the
witnesses were not present at that particular time. PW-6
Asmatullah has not named the complainant in his Court
statement. Moreso, in cross-examination he has also
denied his examination by the police under Section 161
Cr.PC. In above circumstances both the PWs have
failed to prove their presence at the place of occurrence
beyond shadow of reasonable doubt. Reliance is placed

on the case of State through Advocate General,

N.W.F.P Peshawar and another Vs. Shah Jehan and
another (PLJ 2003 SC 399.

10. According to prosecution the appellant
Allah Wasaya and the absconding appellant Ehsanullah
confessed their guilt and their confessional statements
were recorded by PW-7 Akbar Ali, Judicial Magistrate,
D.I.Khan on 27.11.2010. The emphasis of the learned
counsel for the complainant and that of the learned
Addl: A.G. was mainly on the ground that the
confessional statement of the appellant was recorded on

the very second day of the arrest of the appellant, the

Imran/* (D.B) Mr. Justice Ishtiag Ibrahim and Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad, JJ
-l1ll-

confession is true and voluntary and the same alone can
be made basis for conviction.
11. True that confessional statement of the
appellant was recorded on 27.11.2010 by PW-7 but it is
also in the statement of PW-7 that “It is correct that
before producing the accused in my Court, the
accused were not medically examined. Volunteered;
the accused were produced at the expiry of their 24
hours statutory police custody. I did not direct the
medical examination of the accused nor did I
examine their body.” The Investigating Officer (PW-
08) has admitted in his cross examination that “it is
correct that after producing both the accused before
the judicial Magistrate, their handcuffs were removed
on his direction and I was also sent out of the Court
room. From this assertion of PW-8 it is manifest that
confessional of one accused was recorded in the
presence of other. It is also admitted by PW-8 Kifayat
Hussain 1.0 that “The Court had thereafter handed
over to me the accused U/S 13 Arms Ordinance after
one and half hour. I took the jail warrants to the jail.”
In case of Ghani Bakhsh Vs. The State

(PLD 1975 Supreme Court 187), the apex Court held

as under:-

Imran/* (D.B) Mr. Justice Ishtiag Ibrahim and Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad, JJ
-12-

“8. Taking first the judicial
confession, it is well settled that
although a_ retracted judicial
confession is seldom made the
basis of conviction without being
materially corroborated, yet the
position though very rare is not
wholly inconceivable depending
upon the facts and circumstances
of each case as held in this
Court's judgment in State v.
Minhun alias Gul Hassan P L D
1964S C 813. In the instant case,
however we find that the mode
and method of recording the
confession of one accused in the
presence of the other casts
serious doubt on its voluntariness
which in the basic requirement of
law as also for its appeal to the
judicial conscience. The whole
object of legal and judicial
insistence on the meticulous
observance of all the necessary
formalities and precautions laid
down with minute particularity is
to ensure that the confessional
statement should be absolutely
free from the slightest tinge oil
taint of extraneous influence
such as threat, promise or

inducement and the Courts are

Imran/* (D.B) Mr. Justice Ishtiag Ibrahim and Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad, JJ
-13-

placed under an obligation to
affirmatively satisfy themselves
that it is free and voluntary. It
was observed by Denman, J. in
Reg, v. Rosa Rue (1876) 13 Cox.
C C 209: "It is not merely a
question as to whom the
confession is made or when it is
made; but it is a matter in which
you have to get at the mind of the
prisoner, and see whether or not it
is probable that the confession
was made voluntarily, in the
proper sense of the word." I am
afraid, the way the confessional
statement of Dhani Bakhsh
appellant was recorded right in
view of his co-accused at a
distance of about 30 feet from him
possible within his ear-shot which
possibility was of course denied
by the Magistrate and at a time
when the confessional statement
of the acquitted accused had
already been recorded in the
admitted presence of Dhani
Bakhsh who was made to stand in
a corner of the Court Room, it is
difficult to infer that the appellant
remained altogether uninfluenced
by the conduct of his co-accused

in the matter of his own

Imran/* (D.B) Mr. Justice Ishtiag Ibrahim and Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad, JJ
-14-

confessional statement. It is not
difficult to appreciate the
psychological influence on the
mind of the appellant or may be
even his guilty conscience, of what
had already transpired in Court in
his view and within his ear-shot.
The preceding confession of his
co-accused must necessarily have
exercised some persuasive if not
compelling force on his mind to
follow suit. In that view of the
matter, the confessional statement
of the appellant cannot be
characterised as free and
voluntary having been made in an
absolutely free and uninhibited

manner.”

Reliance is also placed on the case of
Muhammad Ismail Vs. The State (2017 SCMR 713),
wherein the Honourable Supreme Court of Pakistan has
given important factors and required standards of
confession.

12. It is also discernable from the record that
the appellant had given his confessional statement in
Sairaiki which was translated into Urdu by the learned
Judicial Magistrate. In cross-examination the Judicial

Magistrate (PW-7) stated that “I had made the accused

Imran/* (D.B) Mr. Justice Ishtiag Ibrahim and Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad, JJ
-15-

understand the definitions of words “approver” and
“subjected to” in Urdu and had satisfied myself. I do
not however remember the exact translation used at
that time.” \t pricks the mind of this Court over the
understanding of the learned Judicial Magistrate of his
command from the Sairaiki language. In addition to
above, the questionnaire and the certificate all are on
printed proformas which practice has also deprecated
by the Superior Courts from time to time.

13. In his statement under Section 342 Cr.PC
the appellant while answering question No.7 stated
that:-

“The alleged confession is the
result of police torture. It is not
voluntary. Moreover, the
confessional statement is not in
accordance with the settled
principle of law and dictum laid
down by the apex Court. At one
occasion, even copies of alleged
confessional statement —_were
handed over to the I.O before any
alleged thumb impression which
is evident from the copy of
questionnaire available on
judicial file. I was produced to the
local police by one Inayat Khan
son of Bahawal Khan r/o Kunda

Imran/* (D.B) Mr. Justice Ishtiag Ibrahim and Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad, JJ
-16-

Sharif on 23.11.2010 and I was

retained in the P.S. without any

,

legal and lawful jurisdiction. ’

In this regard the appellant also produced
the said Inayatullah as DW-1 who stated that on
23.11.2010 the appellant came and asked to him to
surrender him before the local police and on the same
day he took the appellant to the P.S. and surrendered
him before the police. In such view of the matter the
confessional statement of the appellant cannot be relied
upon.

14. Vide recovery memo Ex.PW-1/2_ six
empties of 7.62 bore and one empty of 30 bore were
recovered from the spot and vide recovery memo
Ex.PW-1/3 one Kalashnikov and one 30 bore pistol
were recovered from the possession of accused Allah
Wasaya and Ehsanullah respectively. The empties were
recovered on the day of occurrence i.e. 10.11.2010
while the alleged weapon of offence were recovered
from the possession of the accused on 26.11.2010 and
thereafter on 04.12.2010 all those articles were sent
together to the FSL which in our view is not a safe
course and it smacks of some foul play on the part of

Investigating Agency that till date of recovery of the

Imran/* (D.B) Mr. Justice Ishtiag Ibrahim and Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad, JJ
-17-

weapon the empties remained in their custody in police
station. In Addition to above, it is also strange that
weapon of 7.62 bore was recovered while empties of
.44 bore matched with the alleged crime weapon.
Therefore, the recovery of weapon of offence from the
possession of appellant seems to be doubtful and
cannot be relied upon.

In a case titled Ghulam Akbar and
another Vs. The State (2008 SCMR-1064, it was
observed by their Lordships that law requires that
empty recovered from the spot should be sent to the
laboratory without any delay, failing which such
recovery evidence was not free from doubt and could
not be used against the accused.

Again in the case of Jehangir Vs. Nazer
Farid and another (2002 SCMR-1986), the receipt of
crime empties in the Forensic Science Laboratory after
seven days has been condemned and, as such, it was
considered of no assistance to the prosecution or for
that matter against the accused. Reliance is also placed
on a case law titled Muhammad Younus Khan Vs.
The State (1992 SCMR-545).

It was also observed in the case of

Attaullah_and_ others Vs. The State (PLD 1990

Imran/* (D.B) Mr. Justice Ishtiag Ibrahim and Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad, JJ
-18-

Peshawar-10), that the crime empties should be
immediately dispatched to Arms Expert and should not
be kept by the Investigating Officer because in that
case objection regarding manipulation of recovery will
hold good.

15. There is no second opinion that criminal
justice always lays emphasis on the quality of evidence
which must be of first degree and sufficient enough to
dispel the apprehension of the Court with regard to the
implication of innocent persons alongwith guilty one
by the prosecution, otherwise, the golden principle of
justice would come into play that even a single doubt if
found reasonable would be sufficient to acquit the
accused, giving him/them benefit of doubt because
bundle of doubts are not required to extend the legal
benefit to the accused. In this regard, reliance is placed
on a view held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the
case of "Riaz Masih alias Mithoo Vs. State (NLR
1995 Cr.SC 694).

16. Regarding the golden principle of benefit
of doubt, reference can be made to the celebrated
judgment of the apex Court title "Muhammad

Luqman Vs. The State (1970 S.C.-10), where the

Hon'ble Bench have observed that:-

Imran/* (D.B) Mr. Justice Ishtiag Ibrahim and Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad, JJ
-19-

"It may be said that a finding of
guilt against an accused person
cannot be based merely on the
high probabilities that may be
inferred from evidence in a given
case. The finding as regards his
guilt should be rested surely and
firmly on the evidence produced in
the case and the plain inferences of
guilt that may irresistibly be drawn
from that evidence. —-_ Mere
conjectures and __ probabilities
cannot take the place of proof. If a
case where to be decided merely
on high probabilities regarding the
existence of non-existence of a fact
to prove the guilt of a person, the
golden rule of "benefit of doubt" to
an accused person, which has been
a dominant feature of the
administration of criminal justice
in this country with the consistent
approval of the superior Courts,

will be reduced to a naught".

The dicta laid down in the above precedent
has been re-enforced by the august Supreme Court in the
cases of Tariq Parvez Vs. The State (1995 SCMR-
1345), Muhammad Khan and another Vs. The State
(1999 SCMR-1220) and Muhammad Akram Vs. The
State (2009 SCMR-230).

Imran/* (D.B) Mr. Justice Ishtiag Ibrahim and Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad, JJ
-20-

17. In view of the above, we do not hesitate to
hold that the prosecution has failed to prove its case
against the appellant Allah Wasaya. Accordingly, we
accept the appeal to the extent of appellant Allah Wasay,
set aside the conviction and sentence recorded by the
learned trial Court and acquit him from the charges
levelled against him in the present case. He shall be
released forthwith, if not required in any other case.

18. Criminal Revision No.11-D/2012 for
enhancement of sentence stands dismissed for having
become infructuous to the extent of appellant Allah
Wasaya and the same is adjourned sine die to the extent
of appellant Ehsanullah which shall be relisted after his
arrest on the application of either side.

Announced.
Dt:03.4.2018. JUDGE

JUDGE

Imran/* (D.B) Mr. Justice Ishtiag Ibrahim and Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad, JJ
