Judgment Sheet
PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, ABBOTTABAD BENCH.
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT

Cr.M No.466-A/2018

JUDGMENT
Date of hearing... 200.0000 cee cee L4E/OO/2018 oe cee cee cece cee te tee ee tenes
Petitioner...(Oadeer Ahmad) by Qazi Muhammad Arshad,

AAVOCAE 00. civ vec cee cee cee cess

Respondent (State etc) by M/S Aurangzeb Mughal, DAG and Nadeem
Khan, Advocate..

2K KKK
SYED MUHAMAMD ATTIQUE SHAH, _J:-
Accused/petitioner Qadeer Ahmad, seeks his post
arrest bail in case FIR No.08/2018 dated 03.03.2018
for offences under Sections 18-B and 22-B of the
Immigration Ordinance, 1979 registered at Police
Station FIA/ACC, District Abbottabad.

2. The case of the prosecution, as set up in the
FIR, lodged on the report of Muhammad Ibrahim son
of Maqsood-ur-Rehman, is that the present accused /
petitioner alongwith his brother Jameel obtained
Rs.350,000/- from him for sending him to Dubai on
work visa; that visa was provided by the agent, while,
the air ticket and other expenses were incurred by the

complainant and they have also not provided any
accommodation to them and kept them in a mosque
for two months and thereafter, he was served with a
notice and directed by the company to leave Dubai
and as such, he came from Dubai on his own
expenses.

3. Perusal of record would reveal that the
accused/petitioner is charged for the offences under
sections 18-B/22-B of Immigration Ordinance, 1979,
however, the punishment provided for the said
offences is imprisonment, which may extend to
fourteen years or fine or both and in such like cases,
where offence is also punishable with imprisonment
or fine or both, accused shall be entitled to bail as a
matter of right because if after conclusion of trial, the
trial Court sentenced him with fine only, then in such
eventuality, his detention in judicial lockup would
amount to double jeopardy. Thus, keeping in view the
peculiar facts and circumstances of the present case,
the role of present accused/ petitioner is arguable for
the purpose of bail. The investigation in the case is
complete and accused/ petitioner is no more required

for further investigation to the police or prosecution.
4. The observations rendered hereinabove
being tentative in nature would not affect the mind of
the trial Court in any manner whatsoever, during trial
of the case.
5. Accordingly, for the reasons stated
hereinabove, accused petitioner, Qadeer Ahmad, is
admitted to bail subject to his furnishing bail bonds in
the sum of Rs.200,000/- (Rupees Two lacs), with two
sureties each in the like amount to the satisfaction of
Illaqa/Duty Judicial Magistrate, Abbottabad.

Above are the reasons for short order of this
Court of even date.

Announced. JUDGE
Dt.14.06.2018

/*M.Saleem*/

(SB) Mr. Justice Syed Muhammad Attique shah

