JUDGMENT SHEET
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
PESHAWAR
(Judicial Department)

C.0.C No.85-P/2023
in Cr. A No.911-P/2018

Shaheen Shah Vs, The State through A.G and others

Present: Muhammad Amin Khattak Lachi, Advocate
Lor Petitioner.

Mr. Shakir Ullah Afridi, Advocate
for Respondent No.2.

Date of hearing: 11.07.2023

JUDGMENT
MUHAMMAD NAEEM ANWAR, J.- Shaheen Shah, the
petitioner has filed the instant petition under Article 204 of
the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 in
juxtaposition with the provisions of the Contempt of Court
Ordinance, 2003 for initiating the contempt of Court
proceedings against the respondents for non-compliance of
judgment dated 20.12.2019 rendered by this Court in
Criminal Appeal No.911-P of 2018 titled “Soorat Shah
and another Vs. Abdul Wahab and others”.
2. Muhammad Amin Khattak Lachi, Advocate
representing the petitioner submitted at the bar that the
respondent No.2 namely Abdul Wahab filed a Complaint
bearing No.10 of 2017 u/s 3 of the Illegal Dispossession
Act, 2005 (the Act of 2005) against Soorat Shah, Laiq
Shah, Walayat Shah, Fazal Mir and the present petitioner

alleging therein that he was forcibly dispossessed by them

SabzAli/*  (S.B) HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE NWAR
from his property; that the accused including the present
petitioner were charge sheeted, however, they claimed trial;
that after completion of evidence of the prosecution,
statements of the accused including the present petitioner
were recorded u/s 342 Cr.P.C and after hearing the parties,
the ibid complaint was decided by the learned trial Court
(Sessions Judge, Hangu)} through judgment dated
04.07.2018, wherein it was held that complainant
(respondent No.2 herein) could not prove his case against
Laiq Shah, Walayat Shah and Fazal Mir for dispossession,
thus, they were acquitted of the charges whereas, the present
petitioner and Soorat Shah were convicted u/s 3 of the Act
of 2005 and were sentenced to six months S.I; that they
were also fined to the tune of Rs.100,000/ each to be
recoverable as arrears of land revenue and that both the
convicts were further directed to pay compensation to the
complainant to the tune of Rs.500,000/- jointly. He further
submitted that the judgment of the learned trial Court was

challenged by the convicts before this Court through Cr. A

No.911-P/2018, wherein on 20.12.2019, this Court has held
that the prosecution could not prove the case against the
petitioner and Soorat Shah u/s 3 of the Act of 2005, as such,
their appeal was allowed and they were also acquitted of the

charges. He also submitted that during pending adjudication

SabzAli/* — (S.B) HON’BLE MR, JUSTICE MUHAMMAD NAEEM ANWAR

of the complaint, an interim order u/s 7 of the Act of 2005
was also passed for recovery of possession of the house/
property in favour of the complainant/respondent No.2, on
the strength whereof the possession of the house was taken
from the petitioner, which order too has been set aside by
this Court in its judgment dated 20.12.2019 but the
possession of the house, which was transferred in
compliance of the judgment of the trial Court is with
respondent No.2. He referred to the order sheet dated
05.06.2023 and submitted that respondent No.2 was directed
to appear before this Court in person, hence, representation
of respondent No.2 by Mr. Shakir Ullah Afridi, Advocate is
not in consonance with the directions of this Court and the
law as well. When he was asked about the operative part of
the judgment passed in favour of the present petitioner, he
submitted that if the possession is handed over to him, he
will not press his application for conviction of respondent
No. 2 under the provisions of the Contempt of Court
Ordinance, 2003.

3. Contrarily, Mr. Shakir Ullah Afridi, Advocate
representing the respondent No.2, at the very outset,
submitted at the bar that respondent No.2 is in Italy in
connection with earning of his livelihood, however, in

compliance of the judgment of this Court, whereby the

SabzAli/* — (S.B) , MMAD N. AR
petitioner alongwith one Soorat Shah were acquitted of the
charges u/s 3 of the Act of 2005, a civil suit was filed
against the present petitioner and others, wherein Gul Wazir
has been impleaded as party later, who has disputed the title
of the plaintiff; that in the said suit, temporary injunction
was granted in favour of the plaintiff/respondent No.2
against the defendants including the present petitioner and
the order of the learned trial Court was upheld by the
learned Appellate Court and revision against the order of the
appellate Court was also dismissed from this Court being
infructuous but now the status quo order has been passed
against the defendants by the learned trial Court, which still
holds the field. He also submitted that fate of the
controversy shall be decided by the Civil Court including
that of the defendant Gul Wazir, who considers himself to
be owners of the property and that the petitioner who also
alleged his possession on behalf of said Gul Wazir, the
alleged landlord. He also submitted that no specific order
for recovery of possession was passed by this Court in order
dated 20.12.2019, which could be implemented rather the
judgment of this Court could be enforced. He requested for

dismissal of the instant petition.

4. Arguments heard and record perused.

SabzAli/*  (S.B) HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MUHAMMAD NAEEM ANWAR
5. C.M_No.358-P/2023: This application has been
filed by respondent No.2 for placing on file the copy of
plaint, written statements of Gul Wazir, the defendant and
rest of the defendants, order dated 27.10.2020, copy of the
order of the appellate Court dated 06.04.2021, memorandum
of C.R No.636-P/2021, order dated 29.05.2023 and order of
the learned Family Court-II, Peshawar dated 30.05.2023.
Not only the documents annexed with the instant C.M are
attested copies from judicial record but same are also
pertaining to a suit, which is pending adjudication before the
Civil Court in respect of the same property, thus, in view of
the above in juxtaposition with the affidavit of the deponent,
this application is allowed and the documents annexed
therewith are hereby considered as part and parcel of the
instant C.O.C application.

6. Certain facts are admitted by both the parties i.e.,
the petitioner and respondent No.2, pertaining to filing of
Complaint No.10 of 2017 by respondent No.2 against the
present petitioner and others, wherein after completion of
trial, except Soorat Shah and the present petitioners, all
other accused were acquitted of the charges whereas, the
present petitioner and Soorat Shah were convicted and
sentenced as mentioned above. It is also admitted that after

filing of Cr. A No.911-P/2018, same came up for hearing

SabzAli/*  (S.B) HON’BLE MR. JUSTI Al

before this Court in presence of the respondent No.2 and
appeal of the petitioner and Soorat Shah was allowed,
consequently, the judgment of the learned trial Court was
set aside and they both were acquitted of the charges and the
order, vide which, the possession of the house was taken
from the petitioner during pendency of complaint was also
set aside. It is also not disputed that earlier the present
petitioner approached to this Court through W.P No.1319-
P/2020 with C.M No.210-P/2021 for an appropriate order
directing the respondent No.2 for returning/handing over the
possession of the house to him, which was heard by this
Court on 02.11.2022 and was disposed of in the following
terms:

“After hearing the learned counsel for the petitioner at some
length, he requested for withdrawal of the instant Writ
Petition in order to file C.O.C for the implementation of the
judgment rendered by this court in Criminal Appeal No.911-
P/2018. Order accordingly. The petitioner is at liberty to file

proper petition before the competent forum.”

Apart from the above, scrutiny of record reveals that on
20.12.2019, Cr. A No.211-P/2018 was allowed, wherein
this Court has observed the factual aspect in its Para No.8,

which reads as under:

“§, The revenue record produced in evidence might establish
the joint ownership of complainant/respondent but it could
not be considered in isolation to prove the factum of his

ilegal dispossession from the suit property. At best, his

SabzAli/* — (S.B) HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MUHAMMAD NAEEM ANWAR
contentions could be considered in proceedings before the
civil Court because his ownership is not disputed and when
an illegal dispossession is alleged, then commission of offence
has to be proved through unimpeachable evidence that rings
true and sufficient to award any sentence to the accused. In
a case of mere allegation of illegal dispossession
notwithstanding that the accused is land-grabber or not, it
must be inevitably proved that the complainant was in
possession at such and such time and dispossessed at such
and such time. So, the learned trial Court while convicting
the accused appellant on the basis of evidence available on
record has failed to appreciate the evidence in its true

perspective.”
7. In order to seek the proper redressal, respondent No.2
filed civil suit on 20.01.2020 whereas, the judgment in the
ibid criminal appeal was passed by this Court on 20.12.2019
i.e., within a period of one month, wherein he has sought a
declaration to the effect that he is the owner in possession of

considerable portion of property bearing Ahasra Nos.1531

1534, 1536, 1533, 1532 & 1530 measuring 19-kanal and 01-

marla, with which, the defendants including the present
petitioner have got no concern or interest, as they are not
owners of the property, therefore, their assertion of their
ownership or interference in his possession is ineffective
upon his rights. It was alleged that he was dispossessed by
the defendants, however, possession was restored to him on
18.07.2018, regarding which, a compliance report was
submitted by the SHO. It was also alleged that from the

other owners he has also purchased the property vide
SabzAli/* — (S.B) IN? MMAD NAEEM
mutation No.2753 whereas, the present petitioner alongwith
others defendants have got no possessory or proprietary
rights in respect of the property. This suit was resisted by
the defendants through their written statement filed on
16.6.2020. They have averred in Para No.2 of the factual
objection of the written statement that their possession is at
the instance of Gul Wazir and during pending adjudication
of the suit, Gul Wazir has been impleaded as defendant
No.4 in the suit on 13.07.2020, who has also resisted the
suit through his separate written statement on different legal
and factual objections. In view of the submissions of learned
counsel for the petitioner that he does not intend to
prosecute respondent No.2 under the provisions of the
Contempt of Court Ordinance rather would be satisfied if
the possession is returned to him on the directions contained
in the judgment of this Court dated 20.12.2019, the present
application is an application for implementation or
execution of the judgment of this Court. He contended that
the petitioner was tenant at will but his landlord was Gul
Wazir. The significant aspect for disposal of the instant
petition is that the instant C.O.C was filed on 07.02.2023 for
specific order in terms of the judgment of this Court in Cr.
A No.911-P/2018 dated 20.12.2019. It appears from the

record that earlier he has filed a W.P No.1319-P/2021

SabzAli/* — (S.B) B D NAI
before this Court, which was dismissed as withdrawn on
02.11.2022 whereas during the contest before the Civil
Court an application for grant of temporary injunction was
also moved, with the prayer that the defendants may be
restrained from interference in the disputed property,
alteration thereof and alienation of the same through any
means. This application was heard by the Civil Court on
27.10.2020 and was allowed by confirming the order of ad-
interim status quo for a period of six months. The said order
was also repeated against Gul Wazir on 13.07.2020 after his
impleadment in the suit. The order of the Civil Court was
assailed before the Court of appeal by Gul Wazir etc.,
however, same was dismissed on 06.04.2021 and the order
of the trial Court dated 27.10.2020 was upheld. Then the
petitioner alongwith Gul Wazir, Soorat Shah and Wilayat
Shah approached to this Court through C.R No.636-P/2021
but same too was dismissed being infructuous on
29.05.2023. No doubt, this Court has allowed Cr. A No.911-
P/2018 of the petitioner on 20.12.2019 and has set aside the
order of the trial Court and it is also reflected from the
record that even the interim order passed w/s 7 of the Act of
2005 for recovery of possession in favour of complainant/
respondent No.2 was also set aside but the intricate question

of law and facts was the observation of this Court regarding

SabzAli/*  (S.B) HON’BLE MR, JUSTICE MUHAMMAD NAEEM ANWAR
10

the remedy for respondent No.2/ complainant qua
determination of his proprietorship against the petitioner and
others in juxtaposition with the version of the petitioner that
he was tenant at will of Gul Wazir. There is a question mark
in view of the stance of petitioner alleging himself to the
tenant at will of Gul Wazir on the date, on which, the
possession was taken from him. The suit has also been
resisted by Gul Wazir, after his impleadment as defendant.
The petitioner has nothing to do with the proprietorship and
if he is not the owner of the property then determination of
the rights of Gul Wazir shall be determined by the civil
Court after conclusion of the trial. Undeniably, the
contention of the petitioner that when the interim order
passed by the learned trial Court during pending
adjudication of the complaint against the petitioner has been
set aside by this Court, he was entitled for restoration of
possession but with the able assistance of learned counsel
for the parties, I have gone through from the judgment of
this Court in the referred to above Cr. A No.911-P/2018,
where no such specific order was made except the
observation that the parties may get resolve their issue
pertaining to the determination of their rights from the Court
of competent jurisdiction. This was the reason, which

constrained the petitioner to file a writ petition before this

SabzAli/* — (S.B) HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MUHAMMAD NAEEM ANWAR
4

11

Court for an appropriate order but same was dismissed as
withdrawn later on. In such an eventuality, the contention of
the petitioner to the extent of restoration of possession could
be considered at the earliest i.e., just after decision of the
appeal before filing of any suit before civil Court or
decision thereon but earlier he has filed the writ petition
before this Court which was dismissed as withdrawn and
subsequently the instant C.O.C was filed but the bulky
record reveals that prior to that, suit of respondent No.2 had
not only been instituted before the Civil Court but certain
findings were also rendered which even came up before this
Court through the earlier civil revision filed by the petitioner
and others, however, same was dismissed being infructuous.
8. Keeping in view the prayer of the petitioner
through instant petition, whereby he has confined himself to
the extent of restoration of possession without any interest
in conviction of respondent No.2 who is living abroad in

Italy in juxtaposition with the facts (i) the status of the

petitioner, which as per his narration, is to be tenant of
Gul Wazir; (ii) the finding of this Court in the criminal
appeal ibid for proper redressal from the Civil Court; (iii)
filing of a civil suit u/s 42 of the Specific Relief Act, 1877,
pending adjudication thereof before the civil Court; and
(iv) impleadment of Gul Wazir therein and confirmation of

SabzAli/* — (S.B) HON’BLE MR, JUSTICE MUHAMMAD NAEEM ANWAR
12

the status quo order in favour of the plaintiff/ respondent,
dismissal of the appeal of petitioner from appellate Court
and revision from this Court, are the points, which lead me

to the conclusion that the petitioner, whose status was
nothing more than that of the alleged tenant of Gul Wazir,
shall be resolved by the Civil Court where the matter is still
pending adjudication because the restoration of the
possession to petitioner and dismissal of his suit from the
civil Court will provide no justification of possession of the
petitioner and in such an eventuality, his possession would
be unjustified, unwarranted and nothing but as that of a
trespasser. Insofar as the contention of the learned counsel
for the petitioner that if the possession of the house is not
restored to the petitioner the judgement of this would be
rendered nullity in law is concerned, no doubt that the order
of handing over the possession to respondent No.2 has been
set aside but since the Civil Court was seized with the
matter of title, possession, and the status of present
petitioner then the matter requires to be finally decided by
the Court of competent jurisdiction as this Court has
recorded no findings pertaining to the entitlement of
possession, title or the status of the possession of the

petitioner, thus, the findings of civil Court will have

SabzAli/* — (S.B) BLE MR. JUSTI M ANWAR
13

primacy over the findings of criminal Court, which could
only decide the afore mentioned questions.

9. In the above state of affairs, any order for
restoration of possession in view of the judgment of this
Court, though without any specific order for restoration,
would further amalgamate the controversy, which is still
pending adjudication and would complicate the matter. In
such circumstances, when the petitioner and respondent
No.2 are the parties before the Civil Court in the pending
suit, then appropriate mode for decision of the instant
petition would be in terms of the directions to the learned
Civil Court to decide the fate of the suit of respondent No.2,
which was filed in the year 2020, wherein Gul Wazir has
also been impleaded as party and written statements of all
the concerned have been filed, to decide the main suit within

a period of six months, if not earlier.

10. With above observations, this petition is disposed
of accordingly.
Announced
11.07.2023
JUDGE

Sabz Ali/* — (S.B) BLE MR. i( HAI M
