JUDGMENT SHEET
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
MINGORA BENCH (DAR-UL-QAZA), SWAT
(Judicial Department)

C.R No.358-M/2011

Sultanat Khan and another. .iccsccccsccccccccccsescscesessceveee Petitioners.

Sadbar Khan and others...ccscccceseccerccesecessseranasseeces Respondents.

Present: Mr. Hazrat Rehman, Advocate for Petitioners.

MISS. Asghar Ali and Amjad Hussain, Advocates for
Respondents,

Date of hearing: 03.10.2022

JUDGMENT

MUHAMMAD NAEEM ANWAR, J.- This single judgment in
the instant petition shall also decide connected C.R_No.357-
M2201] titled “Sultanat Khan and another Vs. Sadbar Khan
and others” and C.R No.1284-P/2011 titled “Sadbar_ Khan
and_others Vs. Sultanat Khan _and_ others” as all these
petitions are arising out of one and same consolidated
judgment dated 05.07.2011 of the learned Additional District
Judge/Izafi Zila Qazi, Chakdarra, District Dir Lower,
whereby, the learned Appellate Court through impugned
judgment and decree has modified the findings of the learned
trial Court dismissing suit of plaintiffs No.1 to 4 against
defendants and decreeing it in favour of plaintiffs No.5 to 12
against defendants, and granted.a preliminary decree in favour

of respondents/ plaintiffs against all the defendants.
Sabz AW/* — (S.B) HON'RLE MR. JUSTICE MUMAMMAD NAEEM ANWAR

2. Facts lying in the background of all these petitions are
that respondents No.1 to 11 of instant petition alongwith one
Tajbar Khan filed a suit seeking therein declaration that they
are owners in possession of the property as described in the
headnote “+4! of the plaint, commonly known as Kotkay
Patay, Spina Khawro of the kind of Shawara (barren/unfertile)
with which, the petitioners/ defendants have got no concern
whatsoever and as such they cannot deny from ownership of
plaintiffs. A prayer for recovery of possession was also sought
alongwith a relief for permanent injunction restraining .the
petitioners/defendants from altering the nature of property
through any mean, by alleging therein that they are the
permanent residents of village Ramora Tehsil Adenzai from
their ancestors. being Afghan caste and are original owners
(Asal Malikan) of the property from hill to plain (aw Ue)

whereas, the petitioners/ defendants have migrated from Dir
Upper to this area; that they had been the tenants of plaintiffs
and were put in possession of the property only as mortgagees
and as care taker of the disputed property which is adjacent to
the mortgaged property. It was also alleged that few days. ago,
when the they proceeded to disputed property for:the purpose
of its division/partition amongst the owners, the petitioners/

defendants denied from their proprietorship; that the

SabzAli/* — (S.B} HON’ BLE MR. JUSTICE MUHAMMAD NAEEM ANWAR

f

petitioners/ defendants are not original owners of this area
rather they have purchased certain property and that they being
Malikan-e-Qabza have no interest in common land (Shamilat).
Suit was resisted by the petitioners/ defendants through their
written statement on the grounds that the disputed property, at
the spot, is a barren hill; that plaintiffs No.1 to 3, 11 and
predecessor in interest of plaintiff No.12 had sold the disputed
property through different deeds at different times, whereas
the plaintiff No.4 Majeed Ullah Khan & plaintiffs No. 5. to 10
have no owned property in the estate are no more owners in
the common land which is barren property. It was further
alleged by them in written statement that plaintiffs No.5 to 10
were given.a specific portion in Shawara land known as Babu
Ghundai at Spina Khawaro, which they had sold in favour of
Ghulam Sher Khan, whereas other portion known as Palai Gul
Patay is still in their possession. In addition to above, it was
also alleged that they had been in possession of the property
for last 38 years after its purchase from Hakim Khan, the
plaintiff No.11 in lieu of Rs.1,50,000/- and that they. have
made it cultivable, constructed houses and grown trees therein,
by spending a huge amount, thus, they are. entitled for
improvements if the suit is decreed against them. After a

proper contest, on completion of evidence, suit was decreed in

sabzali/* — (S.B) HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MUHAMMAD NAEEM ANWAR

favour of plaintiffs No.5 to 12, and to the extent of plaintiffs
No. | to 4 it was dismissed by learned trial Court through its
judgment and decree dated 24.02.2007. The plaintiffs No. 1 to
4, being aggrieved from dismissal of their suit, preferred Civil
Appeals No.16/13 of 2007, whereas present petitioners/
defendants filed Civil Appeal No:17/13 of 2007 for setting
aside decree passed against them in favour of plaintiffs No.5 to
12. Both the appeals were consolidated and after hearing same,
learned Appellate Court through its judgment & decree dated
05.07.2011 modified the judgment and decree of the learned
trial Court, whereby dismissal of suit to the extent of plaintiffs
No.1 to 3 was maintained, however, the decree passed by the
learned trial Court was converted into preliminary decree
against the petitioners/ defendants while for determination of
cost of improvements in suit property it was directed that these
factors shall be considered during the course of conversion of

preliminary decree into final decree, hence, all these petitions.
3. | Arguments heard and record perused.

4. It appears from the record that there were three sets of
plaintiffs i.e., (i) plaintiffs No.1 to 4; (ii) 5 to 10; and (iii) 11 &
12. Though the plaintiffs alleged that the defendants were their
tenants in other agricultural properties and were care takers of

disputed of Shawara (barren land) while defendants alleged

SabsAli/* — (S.B)} HON’ BLE MR, JUSTICE MUHAMMAD NAEEM ANWAR

%

that through Ex PW5/I, they have become the owners of
property in lieu of Rs.1,50,000/- and deed to this effect was
executed on 11.01.1996. Neither the petitioners/defendants
have alleged themselves to be the original owners nor they
have denied from the title of the plaintiffs except No. 4 & 5 to
10 and that too on the ground that plaintiffs No.4, was not the
owner in the estate for the purpose of his claim in the common
shawara land likewise, they have asserted that plaintiffs No. 5
to 10 were allotted other properties from the common land
therefore, they have no shares in the disputed property. In such
an eventuality their claim rests on the deed vide which they
alleged to have purchased the property from plaintiffs No. 1,
predecessor in interest of plaintiffs No. 2 & 3 and plaintiff No.
11 (Hakim Khan) through deeds Ex.DWS/1 & Ex.DW7/1
(written on both sides of paper in Persian language), During
the course of arguments Mr. Hazrat Rehman Advocate who is
representing the petitioners stated at the bar that the overleaf of
Ex DW 7/1 is regarding the claim of the petitioners. Though
the front page bears the signatures of executants and the
marginal witnesses but the overleaf of which reflects only the
signatures of Musafer Khan and Tajbar Khan. When the
petitioners claimed to have purchased the property on the basis

of Ex DW 7/1 then they were required to prove it. Admittedly,

Sabzatl/*  (S.B)

it was not signed by the marginal witnesses. In such
circumstances the evidence produced by the parties requires
reappraisal for substantial justice, especially when the
petitioner alleged that both the sides of the deed were written
in the same sitting. Taj Muhammad, Hazar Khan, Jahan Bakht
and Abdul Wahab were named as marginal witnesses of the
deed and the petitioners produced Habib Khan the brother of
Abdul Wahab to prove his signature as DW-6, Hazar Khan as
DW-7, and Taj Muhammad as DW-8. DW-6 deposed in his
cross examination that he couldn’t identify the signature of his
brother Abdul Wahab, DW-7 deposed that the deed was not
signed by him and further deposed that it bears only his name
but not his signature and that in his presence no one had singed
it. Statement of Taj Muhammad is of worth perusal who in his
cross examination deposed that he is illiterate, he had not
thumb impressed the deed, in his presence only single side of
the paper was scribed and lastly, in his presence only. Jahan
Bakht signed the paper. Deed reflects-the name of Jahan Bakht
and not his signature. Thus, none of the signatories of the deed
relied upon by. the petitioners appeared before the Court. in
order to substantiate their contentions for grant of relief in
their favour. When the deed was evaluated, learned counsel for

petitioners contended that it was scribed on 08.01.1965, being

sabzal/* (SB) HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MUHAMMAD NAEEM ANWAR

30-years old document caries presumption of truth in
consonance with the provisions of Evidence Act, 1872. No
doubt that presumption of truth is attached to 30-years old
document but mere 30 years age of a document would not
provide any justification for its proof unless it is proved in
accordance law, when it was questioned. The sole ground that
the age of the document is 30 years would not be taken as
gospel truth, when the genuineness of the document is
disputed, it the duty of the Court to determine the question of
its genuineness and correctness because. age of the document
alone would not amount to be a> proof about the correct
contents of such document. If genuineness of a document was
susceptible to suspicion, the Court could refuse to raise
presumption and could ask for the proof of its contents. Ref:

“Ch. Muhammad Shafi vs. Shamim Khanum’ (2007 SCMR

838). The Hon’ble Supreme court has held that:

“It is settled law that ‘presumption qua thirty years old
document under Article 100 of Qanun-e-Shahadat Order,
1984 is permissive and not imperative. The Court must
consider the evidence of the documents, in order to enable
it to decide whether in any specific case it should or should
not presume proper signature and execution. It is settled
law that the Court should be.very. careful about raising any
presumption under Article 100 in favour of old documents
specially when the same are produced during the trial of
suits in which under proprietary rights are set up on the
basis of such documents/deeds. It is also settled law that the
Court may refuse to apply the presumption where evidence
in proof the document is available, or where the evidence
has produced and disbelieved”.

Sabz Ali/* — (S.B} HON’BLE MR, JUSTICE MUHAMMAD NAEEM ANWAR :

Reference can also be on “Muhammad_ Naseem

Fatima’s case (PLD 2005 Supreme Court 455).

5. More Particularly, when the defendants were alleging to
have purchased the property from some of the plaintiffs as
Sadbar Khan who was the son Musafar Khan alleged
executant, entered in the witness-box but he was not
confronted with the signature of his father in terms of
documentary evidence produced and . relied -upon by . the
petitioners. It. is important to note that the document
Ex.DW7/1, which was later on referred to Forensic Science
Laboratory for its verification, and the report was placed on
record but evidentiary value of such report even if it is positive
could not help the petitioners because of infirmities in the
statement of PWs as discussed in the preceding Para. There is
no cavil with the proposition that sole opinion of expert on its
own cannot be made basis for determining the admissibility of
a document when direct evidence is available, and goes against
the party and the expert opinion, which otherwise is nothing
but confirmatory and explanatory to direct evidence. Rel: Qazi

Abdul Ali and others v. Khawaja Aftab Ahmad (2015 SCMR

284). Moreso, the expert report is not binding upon the Court.

Reliance may be placed on the case of “Mrs, Perin J Dinshaw

SabzAli/* — (S.B} HON’BLE MR, JUSTICE MUHAMMAD NAEEM ANWAR

v. Mubarak Ali ‘and another” (2016 YLR 251), wherein it

was enunciated that:

“Even the report of Expert is an opinion under the law and
it is not binding upon the Court. Undoubtedly, the opinion
of Handwriting Expert is relevant but it does not amount to
conclusive proof, as the opinion of Handwriting Expert is a
very weak type of evidence and the Expert's evidence is
only confirmatory or explanatory of direct or circumstantial

' evidence and the confirmatory evidence. cannot be given

preference where confidence inspiring evidence - is
available. Light can be taken from the judgment of august
Supreme Court of Pakistan reported as "2006 SCMR 193
(Mst. Saadat Sultan and others v. Muhammad Zahur Khan,
and others)".

6. Turning to the other crucial aspect of payment of sale

consideration, neither the witnesses of petitioners nor. the

attorney could prove the payment of sale consideration to their

alleged vendors. When they have alleged to have purchased

the property, they were bound to prove the sale and payment

of sale consideration when it was disputed by other side. Non-

payment of sale consideration would amount to no sale in

favour of vendee.. Hon’ble Supreme Court in case titled

“Sardar Ali versus Khan” (2005 SCMR 1583) has held:

Sahz Ali/*

(SB)

“It is true that P.W.3 is scribe of the document but he had
failed to furnish trustworthy evidence to establish that the
‘transaction in respect of sale of land took place between the
parties in pursuance whereof the petitioner paid Rs.
1,00,000 out of total sale consideration of Rs.1,25,000.
Since the document (Exh.P.1) has not been proved on
record according to law, therefore, no exception .can be
taken to the impugned judgment which is based on correct

appreciation of evidence available on record.”
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MUHAMMAD NAEEM ANWAR

10

7. In Muhammad Rasheed Khan’s case eo SCMR 740)

it was held by the apex Court that:

“This is an admitted fact that only one marginal witness to
the agreement to sell was produced and he also did not
support the claim of the appellant regarding payment of
sale consideration in his presence as was mentioned in the
agreement therefore, the assertion of the respondent that
her signature on the agreement were obtained deccitfully

.. would be sufficiently supported by the evidence on the
record. The genuineness of the agreement and the
transaction of sale was not proved as per requirement of
Article 17 read with Article 15 of Qanun-e-Shahadat Order,
.1984 and “this is settled law that relief of specific
performance cannot be granted unless the execution of sale
agreement as per requirement of law and payment of sale
consideration in part or full is proved.” .

The apex Court in case titled “Ghulam Mustafa versus

Muhammad Yahya” (2013 SCMR 684) has held that:

“This is an admitted fact that only one marginal witness to
the agreement to sell was produced and he also did not
support the claim of the appellant regarding payment of
sale consideration in his presence as was mentioned in the
agreement therefore, the assertion of the respondent that
her signature on the agreement were obtained deceitfully
would be sufficiently. supported by. the evidence on.the
record. The genuineness of the agreement and the
‘transaction of sale was not proved as per requirement of
Article 17 read with Article 15 of Qanun-e-Shahadat Order,
1984 and this is settled law that relief of specific
performance cannot be granted unless the execution of sale
agreement as per requirement of law and payment.of sale
consideration in part or full is proved.”

Reliance may be placed on Mst. Hajyane Bar Bibi’s case

(PLD 2014 SC 794) & Moiz Abbas’s case (2019 SCMR 74).

8. Moreover, learned counsel for the petitioners/ defendants

contended that since the document was executed on

Sabzali/* (SB) HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MUHAMMAD NAEEM ANWAR

11

08.01.1965, therefore, ‘neither it requires the proof as provided
under Article 79 of Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984 nor the
provisions of Limitation Act, 1908 would be applicable to it,
as in those days, no such law was extended to this particular
area. Be that as it may, this matter requires determination
being based upon the principle of preponderance of evidence,
which on evaluation of it does not favour the petitioners/
defendants. Reliance in this regard may be placed on the law
enunciated by the apex Court in the cases of “Ch. Abdul
Hamid Vs. Deputy Commissioner and others” (1985 SCMR
359) and “Ch. Muneer Hussain Vs, Mst. Wazeeran Mai alias

Mst. Wazeer Mai’ (PLD 2005 SC 658).

9. Lastly, the contention of Mr. Hazrat Rehman, Advocate
representing the petitioners that when the status. of the
petitioners/ defendants was-not proved to be that of care takers
of the property then their possession is “admitted bythe
plaintiffs qua the execution of document dated 08.01.1965, the
suit of plaintiffs/respondents deserves dismissal is also
misconceived because the document has not been proved and
that permissive possession could not provide the petitioner any
shelter for dismissal of suit “and insofar -as the. adverse
possession: is concerned the same.has been held by the apex
Court to be repugnant to the injunction of Islam. The status of

Sabzai/* (S.B) HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MUNAMMAD NAEEM ANWAR

12"

the petitioners/ defendants when they could not prove their
ownership in juxtaposition with the relief of the plaintiffs,
whereby recovery of possession was sought against them,
provides a cause of action to the plaintiffs when the petitioners
denied from their title. Now, their status over the disputed
property is nothing more than that of encroacher or trespasser

which deserves their dispossession through process of law.

10. The findings of the learned Appellate Court in granting
the decree for preliminary decree are against the law because
the petitioners have no right to remain in possession.
Similarly, the findings of learned trial Court are also the result

of misreading and nonreading of record.

11. For the reasons discussed above, the judgment and decree
of the learned Appellate Court to the extent of conversion of
final decree into preliminary decree was against the law. The
defendants have got no concern whatsoever and in such a way
they could not justify their possession from the moment they
denied the title of plaintiffs. Likewise, the findings of learned
trial Court in dismissing the suit to the extent of plaintiff No.
No. 1 to 4 are also held to be the result of misreading and

nonreading of record, thus, it is held that:

The plaintiffs are the owners and defendants
/petitioners have got no concern or interest with the

disputed property, the findings of learned Appellate
Sabz Aui/* (S.B) HON’ BLE MR. JUSTICE MUHAMMAD NAEEM ANWAR

we

Court and learned trial Court to the extent of dismissal
of plaintiffs’ suit are set_aside. Consequent to the
acceptance of C.R No, 1284-Mof 2011, the suit of the

plaintiffs stands decreed, whereas this Ciyil Revision
No, 358-M_of 2011 & C.R No. 357-M_ of 2011 are

dismissed,

12. Keeping in view the legal aspect of the matters no

order as to costs. All these petitions are disposed of in above

terms.
Announced ce Wk
03.10.2022 _ 7

JUDGE
Sabzali/* — (S.B) THION’RLE MIR. JUSTICE MUHAMMAD NAEERTANSUAR

GHB ol?
