JUDGMENT SHEET
PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, PESHAWAR
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT
Cr.M BA No.3678-P/2019
Shah Fahad Vs the State & another

Date ofhearing: 02.01.2020
Mr. Gul Hussain Khilji, Advocate for the petitioner.
Mr. Rab Nawaz Khan, AAG, for the State.

Mr. Irfan Ali Yousafzai, Advocate, for the complainant.

JUDGMENT

IK

AHMAD ALL, J.- Through the instant bail petition, the
accused-petitioner (Shah Fahad), seeks his post-arrest
bail in case FIR No.948 dated 29.09.2019, charged
under Section 377-B PPC r/w 53-CPA, Police Station,
Par Hoti (Mardan). Same relief was, however, declined
to the petitioner by the learned trial Court vide order
dated 12.11.2019.

2. In view of the Judgment in case titled
“Muhammad Shakeel Vs the State” reported in PLD
2014 SC 458, facts of the case need not be mentioned at
bail stage. However, allegation against the petitioner is
that complainant charged him for trying to subject her
minor daughter to sexual intercourse. Accordingly, FIR
ibid was registered and the accused-petitioner was taken
into custody, hence the instant petition for bail.

3. Arguments heard and record perused.
Page 2068
4.  Perusal of record reveals that the occurrence took
place on 29.09.2019 at 10 hrs, but report was lodged 16
hrs after delay of about 6 hrs without any plausible
explanation.

5. No doubt, the complainant, in his report, has
though charged accused for the commission of offence,
but the medical as well as FSL report available on
record suggests that no sexual act was committed with
the victim. Except the solitary statement of complainant,
no other incriminating evidence is available on record to
prima facie connect the accused-petitioner with the
commission of crime. Besides, no other eyewitness has
been cited so as to support the version of complainant.

Reliance is placed on 2019 P.Cr.L.J 899.

6. So far as applicability of sections 53 of the
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Child Protection and Welfare Act,
2010 (hereinafter to be referred as the Act of 2010), is
concerned, it depicts that this law was specially
introduced/enacted and promulgated in the Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa with particular purposes i.e. to provide for
the care, protection, maintenance, welfare, training,
education, rehabilitation and reintegration of 'children at
risk' in the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa. For the sake of
convenience and ready reference, the preamble of the
Act of 2010, is reproduced below:-

"WHEREAS, it is expedient to provide for the care,
protection, maintenance, welfare, training, education,
Page 3 of S

rehabilitation and reintegration of children at risk in the
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa".

"Child at risk" has been defined under section 2(1)(e) of
the Act in the following words:-

"Child at risk" means a child in need of protection, who

@ is at risk, including an orphan, child with
disabilities, child of migrant workers, child
working and or living on the street, child in
conflict with the law and child living in extreme
poverty.

(ii) _ is found begging; or

(iii) is found without having any home or settled place
of abode or without any ostensible meaning of

subsistence; or

(iv) has a parent or guardian who is unfit or
incapacitated to exercise control over the child; or

(v) __ lives in a brothel or with a prostitute or frequently
visits any place being used for the purpose of
prostitution or is found to associate with any
prostitute or any other person who leads an
immoral or depraved life; or

(vi) __ is being or is likely to be abused or exploited for
immoral or illegal purposes or gain; or

(vii) _ is beyond the parental control; or
(viii) is imprisoned with the mother or born in jail;

(ix) _ has lost his parents or one of the parents and has no
adequate source of income; or

(x) _ is victim of an offence punishable under this Act or
any other law for the time being in force and his
parent or guardian is convicted or accused for the
commission of such offence; Or

(xi) _ is left abandoned by his parent or parents as the
case may be, which will include a child born out of
wedlock and left abandoned by his parent;

7. Keeping the Preamble of the Act in juxtaposition
with the definition of the "Child at risk" as contemplated
under section 2(1)(e) of the Act coupled with the facts
and circumstances of the instant case it could not be
ascertained as to whether the alleged victim, falls under

the definition of "child at risk" or otherwise. In such an
Page 405
eventuality, the applicability of section 53 of the Act of
2010, to the case of petitioner is yet a begging question.
Wisdom can be derived from case law reported in 2016

SCMR 1523, 2014 MLD 190 & 2018 YLR Note 114.

8. In such eventuality, when the child did not fall
under the definition of “child at risk” as provided under
Section 53, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Child Protection and
Welfare Act, 2010; and when except the solitary
statement of complainant without any medical support,
no other incriminating evidence is available on record to
show any nexus of the accused-petitioner with the
commission of crime, this Court could not withhold the

concession of bail, at least, at this stage.

9. Investigation in the case is complete and accused-
petitioner is no more required to the prosecution for the
very purpose. The accused-petitioner is a minor and in
view of the above stated facts, his case calls for further
inquiry under Sub-Section (2) of Section 497 Cr.P.C as
well, therefore, the situation tilts the scales of justice in

favour of bail rather than jail.

10. Apart from the above, it has been held time and
again by the august Supreme Court that bail does not
mean acquittal of accused but only change of custody

from Government agencies to the sureties, who on
Page Sots
furnishing bonds take responsibility to produce the
accused whenever and wherever required to be
produced. Reliance could be placed on case reported in
2008 SCMR 807 “Haji Muhammad Nazir Vs State”.

11. Before parting with this order, this court finds it
necessary to mention that all the observations recorded
above are tentative assessment just for the disposal of
bail petition and not intended to influence the mind of
trial Court, which is free to appraise the evidence strictly
in accordance with law and merits of the case.

12. For what has been discussed above and on
tentative assessment of material available on file, a case
arguable for the grant of bail is made out. Consequently,
this bail application is allowed and accused-petitioner,
named above, is admitted to bail provided he furnishes
bail bonds in the sum of Rs.200,000/- with two sureties
each in the like amount to the satisfaction of learned
Illaqa/Duty Judicial Magistrate, who shall ensure that
the sureties are local, reliable and men of means.

13. Above are the reasons of short order of even date.

Announced;
02.01.2020

JUDGE

Amjad, PS SB Mr. Justice Ahmad Ali
JUDGMENT SHEET
PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, PESHAWAR
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT
Cr.Misc.BA No.3678-P/2019

“Shah Fahad versus The State & another”

ORDER
Date of hearing 02.01.2020
Mr. Gul Hussain Khilji, Advocate for the petitioner.
Mr. Rab Nawaz Khan, AAG, for the State.
Mr. Irfan Ali Yousafzai, Advocate for the complainant.

REKKKKKERE

AHMAD ALL, J.- For the reasons to be recorded later, this bail

application is accepted and Shah Fahad, accused-petitioner is
allowed bail in case FIR No.948, dated 29.09.2019 charged
under Sections 377-B PPC r/w Section 53 of the Child
Protection and Welfare Act, 2010, registered at Police Station,
Par Hoti District Mardan, provided he furnishes bail bonds in
the sum of Rs.2,00,000/- (rupees two lac), with two sureties
each in the like amount to the satisfaction of the Illaqa/Duty
Judicial Magistrate concerned, who shall ensure that the
sureties are local, reliable and men of means.

ANNOUNCED.

02.01.2020.
JUDGE

Himayat, PS
