\f
‘ ~~
JUDGMENT SHEET
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT BANNU BENCH
(Judicial Department)

BA No.218-B of 2021

Nasim Ullah Khan
Vs
The State & others
JUDGEMENT
Date of hearing 24.05.2021

Petitioner by:
Mr. Faroog Khan Sokari Advocate

Respondents by:
Muhammad Rashid Khan Dirma Khel Advocate

State by:

Mr. Saif-ur-Rehman Khattak Addl: A.G

ORR AR A III
SAHIBZADA_ ASADULLAH, _J.--- After having been
booked in case F.I.R No.525 dated 16.09.2020 under
section 302/324 P.P.C Police Station Mandan, Bannu,
the petitioner applied for post arrest bail before the
court of learned Additional Sessions Judge-IV, Bannu,
which was declined vide order dated 17.04.2021.
Feeling aggrieved, the petitioner approached this court
through the instant bail petition.

2. Brief facts of the case as per contents of
FIR are that on 16.09.2020 at about 12:45 hours,
complainant Abdul Qayum Khan brought the dead
body of his nephew Zahir Ullah and reported the matter
to the local police in DHQ Hospital, Bannu to the
effect that on the eventful day he alongwith his nephew

Zahir Ullah Khan left the house of his brother
ras

-2-
Sadrullah Khan situated at village Shakrullah Beri
Khel, that in the meanwhile at about 12:00 hours the
accused/petitioner duly armed with Kalashnikov
suddenly appeared and started firing at them with
murderous intention. Resultantly, his nephew Zahir
Ullah Khan got hit and fell down near the main gate of
his house, while the complainant luckily escaped
unhurt. The accused decamped from the spot after
commission of offence and that he could do nothing
being empty handed. His nephew Zahir Ullah Khan
succumbed to his injuries on the spot. Motive for the
offence was stated to be previous blood feud between

them, hence, the instant F.LR.

3. Learned counsel for the petitioner argued
that the accused/ petitioner is innocent and falsely been
involved in the instant case. He further submitted that
the presence of the petitioner at the stated time is not
established from the record, rather on the day and at the
time of incident, he was present in the court premises, in
connection of a superdari application submitted by his
brother, for the return of a Kalashnikov. He lastly
submitted that the Investigating Officer collected
evidence in that respect including affidavit tendered by

all concerned.
-3-

Contrarily, the learned Addl: Advocate

General representing the state, assisted by learned
counsel for the complainant submitted that the accused
is directly charged for murder of deceased in a promptly
lodged report and the collected material leaves no scope
for further inquiry and the petitioner does not deserve

the requested concession.
4. Heard and record perused.

5. The record leaves no ambiguity to tell that the
accused/ petitioner is directly charged for commission of
murder of the deceased and the matter was promptly
reported to the local police. The Investigating Officer
visited the spot, prepared the site plan on the pointation of
the complainant, recovered blood stained earth from the
place of incident alongwith 05 empties of 7.62 bore and
also observed bullet marks on the western wall behind the
deceased. The collected material prima facie tilts the
balance in favour of the prosecution but on merits.
However, it is essential to deal with another aspect of the
case, as the petitioner soon after getting his interim bail
before arrest, submitted an application for fair

investigation and the Investigating Officer visited the
-4-

Court premises, recorded statements of all concerned and
collected affidavits in respect of the plea taken. It is
pertinent to mention that the Investigating Officer also
collected the call data record, which was stressed by the
learned counsel to make us believe that the petitioner at
the stated time was present in the Court premises. Though
the plea of alibi cannot out rightly be rejected but keeping
in view the emerging trend regarding collecting evidence
in respect of innocence of all concerned, that too, at bail
stage has increased the anxiety of the prosecution and this
court as well, need is there to see its genuineness and
authenticity, but that is possible only when the matter
comes before the trial Court. The plea of alibi if taken at
the earliest shall not out rightly be rejected, but that varies
from case to case and with utmost respect the present case
is an exception. The situation has been attended to by the

apex Court, in case titled “Naseer Ahmad Vs_the State

(PLD 1997 SC 347) it is held that:

“A trend has developed nowadays
that eye-witnesses some times; take a
somersault and give statements which

are different from prosecution case
-5-

and some times file affidavits also at
the stage of hearing of bail
applications of accused persons with
intention of creating doubt in the case
of prosecution to enable the accused
to get bail. The Courts have to be very
careful in such cases and see that bail
applications are disposed of strictly
according to law on merits keeping in
view the distinction between tentative
assessment and actual evaluation of

evidence by the trial Court.”

6 True that the petitioner submitted an
application regarding his innocence with request for fair
investigation, but equally true that at this stage it is hard
to determine the innocence of the petitioner in light of
the collected evidence, as appreciating the evidence in
that respect on one hand may prejudice the case of
either side, while on the other, amounts to deeper
appreciation of evidence, which is not warranted at bail
stage, as indulging into such practice is to pre-empt the
powers of the trial court. This court:is conscious of the
fact that bail applications cannot be heard and decided
in a vacuum; and that the courts of law while deciding
the bail matters should apply its judicial mind to the
collected evidence, so to avoid miscarriage of justice,
but this court cannot ignore that every particular case

has its own peculiar circumstances.
-6-
- 7. The Courts while considering bail matters
of an accused, involved in non-bailable offences are to
see, as to whether the collected material are sufficient
for believing him guilty of an offence entailing capital
punishment, then in that situation the concession shall
not be extended, and if the same concession is granted
to every accused without considering the merits of the
case, on the mere ground that every accused is innocent,
unless and until proven guilty, then the thin line drawn
between the two categories of offence i.e. bailable and
nonbailable would eliminate. This discretion must be
exercised judiciously, after appreciating facts and
circumstances of each case. In presence of significant
material constituting reasonable grounds connecting the
accused with the alleged offence, the courts are always

slow to accede to the requested concession.

8. After applying judicial mind to the
collected material on file, this court reaches nowhere
but to hold that the petitioner prima facie seems
connected with commission of the offence and could not
succeed in making out a case for bail. This application

is bereft of merits stands dismissed.

wD Announced Cre
24.05.2021 ia
2.7 MAY 2021 “Mme
JUDGE
. | (S.B)
. AGO Va Hon'ble Mr. Justice Sahibzada Asadullah

