JUDGMENT SHEET
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
PESHAWAR
(Judicial Department)
Cr.Misc(BA) No. _ 1426 of 2015
JUDGMENT

Date of hearing 21.8.2015

Petitioner (by) Muhammad Munir

Respondent (by) State

38 2 ok ok ok

ROOH-UL-AMIN KHAN, J:- _ This single order shall
dispose of the instant bail application as well bail
application No. 1446-P of 2015, whereby the petitioner
Muhammad Munir S/O Abdur Rashid seeks his release
on bail in case FIR No. 11/2015, dated 18.3.2015
registered at Police Station FIA, Peshawar, under section
36 and 37 of Electronic Transaction Ordinance 2002,
section 419, 420 PPC and section 30 NADRA Act,

2. The petitioner being remained unsuccessful to get
the discretionary relief of bail from the court below has
approached this court for the same relief through the
above mentioned two separate criminal miscellaneous
applications filed through different counsel, viz the
former through Mr. Hidayat Ullah Afridi, Advocate while

the latter is filed on 7.8.2015 through Mr. Ghulam Nabi,
-2-

Advocate. Both the applications are supported by duly
sworn affidavit to the effect that no such bail application
has earlier been filed by the petitioner before this court or
august Supreme Court of Pakistan. Since both the
applications have been filed by the petitioner for grant of
same relief, therefore the latter bail application No. 1446-
P/2015 being not maintainable as infructuous stand
dismissed. It is noted with concern that the litigants have
adopted an unprecedented routine of filing successive bail
applications through different counsels, by disclosing or
without disclosing to them about the engagement of
earlier counsel and filing application on the same facts
and grounds. Engaging the services of two or more
different counsels by accused for attempt to get the same
relief on the same facts and grounds is a matter which
ostensibly provided fodder to an impression about an
extraneous consideration, therefore Honorable the Chief
Justice of this court, in pursuance of the judgment of
august Supreme Court was pleased to issue broad-
spectrum directive to the effect that in future all type of
bail applications shall be supported by duly sworn
affidavit, disclosing the fact that no such bail application
has earlier been filed by the petitioner, before this court
or august supreme court, on the same facts and grounds.

Regardless the judgment (supra) and directive of Hon’ble
-3-

the Chief Justice of this court, the petitioner has filed two
different applications for the desired relief on same facts
and grounds, so much so, each application is
accompanied by an affidavit showing an empathic and
explicit declaration that no such petition has earlier been
filed. I must admit that I am at a loss to understand why
such a pattern is being followed by the petitioner as well
his learned counsels and what can be the factual or legal
justification for adopting such a pattern. There is in fact
no valid or relevant explanation to justify the act of
petitioner or his counsels; however it must be reiterated
that such an act would not be conducive to fetch any

productivity in favour of petitioner.

3. There is yet another aspect of this matter which is
also quite disconcerting. On 13.8.2015, the clerk of
counsel for petitioner appeared before the Deputy
Registrar but due to non availability of the requisite
record, the case was posted for further proceeding on
19.8.2015. On the date fixed before the Deputy Registrar,
none attended the office; therefore, the case was placed
before this court for disposal. Today, despite service none
is present from petitioner side which shows lack of
interest of counsels for petitioner, in pursuing the instant

as well connected bail application. The professional duty
-4-

of an Advocate is that he is supposed to appear in Court
when a case is called, failing which will indicates lack of
respect of counsels toward their professional duties,
which is not contributing to the proper administration of
justice and is also prohibited by the Legal Practitioner
and Bar Council Act. Such behaviors of advocate
provide good cause for taking disciplinary action against
him, however, without commenting upon the conduct of
the counsels for petitioner, suffice it to say that being
application for bail, it cannot be kept pending for
indefinite period, consequently, the learned Standing

counsel was invited to the rostrum to assist the court.

4. Perusal of record would reveal that on complaint
of Ms. Shagufta Amin, an inquiry was conducted by
Federal Investigation Agency wherein the relevant record
was obtained from the Facebook Incorporation including
I.P address against the fake facebook profile available on

link www.facebook.com/profile.php. As per information

provided by Facebook Incorporation, USA the I.P address
belong to I.P pool of PTCL. On further investigation the
PTCL Regulatory Affair Department provided
information that the I.P address were assigned to PTCL
landline No.0995-613389 being installed in the name of

DDMA at District Coordination Office Haripur. During
-5-

raid conducted by the aforementioned agency, the
petitioner was found sitting on the computer of DDMA
section of Deputy Commissioner Office, who was
arrested and interrogated by the FI Agency. During the
investigation he disclosed about creating and operating
the fake facebook profile in the name of complainant and
has also uploaded her personal pictures on the above said
profile without her consent. The investigation agency has
collected sufficient material coupled with the data from
Facebook Incorporation USA through Facebook Law
Enforcing online request system, which fully support the
allegation of complainant. The arrest of petitioner while
using the computer connected to the landline No. of
DDMA Section of DCO office, Haripur, further
supplement the involvement of petitioner in the crime
against society. From the tentative assessment of material
available on record coupled with recovery of electronic
devices, it is sufficient to affirm that prima facie
reasonable grounds exist to connect the accused petitioner

with the commission of a heinous offence.

5. In view of the above, the petition being devoid

of merit stands dismissed.
-6-

6. Before parting with this order, I deem it
appropriate to emphasize the role of advocate in legal
profession. Advocates, in addition to being professionals,
are also officers of the courts and play a vital role in the
administration of justice. Accordingly, the set of rules
that govern their professional conduct arise out of the
duty that they owe the court, the client, their opponents
and other advocates. An Advocate enjoys a very high
position in the society and the Courts of law as well as
the general public repose great trust in Advocates and
they are expected to maintain the dignity of the legal
profession and not to betray the sacred trust reposed in
them. In a recent judgment rendered in case titled Liaqat
Ali Khan versus The State and 6 others (PLD 2015
Peshawar 115), this court while laying emphasis on the
canon of legal ethics held that “the central function of the
legal profession is to promote the administration of
justice. If the practice of law is thus a public utility of
great implications and a monopoly is statutorily granted
by the nation, it obligates the lawyer to observe
scrupulously and with extreme conscientiousness those
norms which make him worthy of the confidence of the
community in him as a vehicle of justice-social justice”.

7. The menace of filing successive applications for

bail by the petitioner is uprising day by day and rapidly
-7-

turning the values and norms of legal ethics, code of
conduct and etiquettes of legal profession. In such an
eventuality, only the members of the lawyer fraternity are
expected to come forward for curbing the imperil and
threat to legal profession, because the Advocate is under
laden duty to maintain the dignity and high standard of
the legal profession as well as his own dignity as a
Member of the Legal fraternity, both within and outside
the Court. It is also estimated that the lawyers shall
deflect the course of filing successive and simultaneous
bail applications on same fact and ground not only to
save and maintain the long established practice of this
Court, but also because such a course shall merit of
avoiding the possibility of two contradictory orders in the
same case by the High Court. I have fearful expectation
and virtually having an apprehension, rather it is pinching
that such a practice shall tends to encourage malpractice
by the accused persons and to bring the judicial system
into disrepute, because in the event of a conflicting order
being given by another single bench in a subsequent
application, an impression, though false, may be created
that the second order was based on_ extraneous

considerations.

8. I do not want to lay more stress on the duties of

members of legal fraternity except to point out to them
-8-

the leading judgments handed down by the august
supreme Court in case titled Nazir Ahmed and another
Versus The State and others (PL D 2014 Supreme Court
241) wherein the principles of propriety and practice in
connection of successive bail application are enunciated.
Needless to say that any decision of the Supreme Court,
shall to the extent that it decides a question of law or is
based upon or enunciates a principle of law, is binding on
every organ of the state and all the Courts in Pakistan and
all judicial authorities throughout Pakistan shall act in aid

of the Supreme Court.

9. The Office shall communicate the copy of this
order to the secretary Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Bar council
for placing it before the General Body of the Council and
all presidents and General Secretaries of High
Court/circuit benches, District and Tehsil Bar
associations for the purpose to ensure the strict
compliance of principle enunciated in the judgment of
august Supreme Court (PLD 2014 Supreme Court
241) and directive of Honorable the Chief Justice of

Peshawar High Court.

Announced on;
21" of August, 2015.

JUDGE
