JUDGEMENT SHEET
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
BANNU BENCH

(Judicial Department)

Cr.Mise:BA # 339-B of 2017.

Mehmood Zaman VERSUS The State Ete:

JUDGEMENT

Date of hearing: 20.9.2017.

Appellant-petitioner: By Fazal Qadir, Advocate.

Respondent: State By Shahid Hameed Qureshi Addl:

AG and Others by Ahmad Jan Khattak

Advocate.

SHAKEEL AHMAD, J.--- Through the instant criminal

miscellaneous bail petition, the accused / petitioner Mehmood

Zaman son of Aseel Khan seeks post-arrest bail in crime report

No. 154 dated 18.4.2016 registered U/Ss-302/324/148/149/427

P.P.C at Police Station Sabir Abad, District Karak.

2. Case of the prosecution as set-forth in the crime

report are that Shahadat Mir complainant reported the matter to

police to the effect that on 18.4.2016, he along-with his sons
namely- NoorNabi, Fazal Rabi, Naeem Ullah s/o Sawab Jan

had gone to the Hujra of Mian Nissar Gul to watch a music

show. After termination of the program, he and his son Noor

Nabi boarded on motor bike while deceased Fazal Rabi, Naeem

Ullah and Niaz Mohammad boarded on another motor bike. At

about 0130 hours on reaching the spot, accused Najibullah,

Mosam, Shah Zaman, Sajid, Zarmat Khan, Mehmood Zaman,

Arman Gul, Siddique and Akhtar Zaman, were already present

there, appeared they were identified by the complainant in the

light of his motor bike, as soon as the complainant passed them,

accused started firing on the motorcycle on which the deceased

were following the complainant, resultantly, the son of the

complainant Fazal Rabbi, Niaz Muhammad, and Naeemullah

hit and died on the spot. Accused decamped from the scene of

crime, after commission of offence. Motive as disclosed is

previous blood feud with Mosam Khan while rest of accused

were facilitators. Thus, the accused were booked in the ibid

FIR.
3. The learned counsel for the petitioner / accused

submitted that at the time of occurrence, petitioner / accused

was serving in United Arab Emirates and he was not present on

the spot. He drew my attention to the letter dated 25.7.2017

which was written by the Superintendent of Police to the

Director Immigration Peshawar to provide the record of the

petitioner / accused from 17.4.2016 till date and in pursuance

thereof the Deputy Director FIA provided the relevant record

showing presence of the petitioner / accused in UAE. He next

contended that the plea of alibi raised in the bail matter may not

be out-rightly rejected and can be gone into for the purpose of

grant or refusal of bail. He lastly argued that there are no

reasonable grounds to believe that the petitioner / accused has

committed the alleged crime but there is sufficient scope of

further inquiry into the guilt of the accused.

4. As against that the learned counsel for the

respondent / complainant argued that the petitioner / accused

has specifically been named in the FIR for the commission of

offence. He next contended that the PM report, site-plan and
version of the complainant, if placed in a juxta position are

consistent, inter-alia; he lastly argued that the offence with

which the petitioner / accused is charged falls within the

prohibition contained in Section.497 Cr.P.C.

5. The learned A.A.G appearing on behalf of the

State concedes the contentions of the learned counsel for the

petitioner and argued that the plea of alibi of the accused is

supported by Pass-port, Tickets and other documents showing

presence of the petitioner / accused in UAE during the days of

incident.

6. Arguments heard and record perused with the

valuable assistance of the learned counsel for the parties.

7. Perusal of the record reveals that the plea of alibi

raised by the petitioner / accused , prima-facie, finds support

not only from examination of original Pass-port, Shaheen Air

Line ticket and IBM travel history report provided by the

Deputy Director, FIA, Immigration Peshawar in pursuance of

the letter dated 25.7.2017 written by Superintendent of Police

(Investigation) Wing Karak. Perusal of the Poss-port reveals
that the accused left Pakistan for United Arab Emirates on

28.5.2015 and came back to Pakistan on 20.02.2017 while the

alleged crime took place on 18.4.2016. The plea of alibi taken

by the petitioner / accused has not been disbelieved by the

prosecution rather it was accepted after due verification from

FIA.

8. In case of Amir Vs: The State reported in PLD

1972 SC 277 it was held that " for purpose of bail, law not to be

stretched in favour of prosecution-Benefit of doubt, if any

arising, must go to accused even on bail stage". Similar view

was taken in the case of Manzoor V. The State (PLD 1972 SC

81). These principles so laid down, are based on enunciation of

law in interpreting the provision of Section.497, Cr.P.C and

broader principle of justice.

9. In the case of Malik Muhammad Salihin V. Arshad

Sidique and two others 1997 SCMR 1829 it was held as under:-

"plea of alibi raised in a bail matter may not be

rejected out-rightly and can be gone for the purpose of grant or

refusal of bail".
In this respect reference can also be made on the

case Gul Khan V. Asghar Khan and another 2012 P.Cr.L.J

218.

10. In view of the above stated facts and

circumstances, case of the petitioner Muhammad Zaman clearly

falls under Sub Section-2 of Section-497 cr.P.C, therefore, he is

entitled to the grant of bail, hence, this petition is allowed and

petitioner is granted bail in the sum of Rs.3,00,000/ (Three

Lacs) with two sureties each in the like amount to the

satisfaction of Illaqa/Judicial/Duty Magistrate who shall ensure

that the sureties are local and men of means.

11. The above observations are tentative in nature,

which will not prejudice the case at the trial stage.

Announced.
20.9.2017 JUDGE

*Imran steno*
