Judgment Sheet

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
PESHAWAR.

JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT

Cr.A No. 680-P of 2014.

JUDGMENT
Date of hearing............... 13.09.2017... ... ccc ec cece cece ene ee eee eneee
Appellant(s)...(Tariq Mehmood etc) by Ms. Farhana Marwat,

Advocate.

Respondent(s)/State/ANF by Mr. Tariq kakar, Advocate, Standing
Counsel for ANF.

Wits

QALANDAR ALI KHAN, J:- This criminal
appeal under Section 48 CNSA, 1997, by Tariq
Mehmood and Imran Haider, appellants, is
directed against the judgment/order dated
03.12.2014 of learned Judge, Special Court
(CNS), Peshawar, whereby the appellants were
convicted and sentenced to life imprisonment
and fine of Rs.2,00,000/-, ‘to each one’, or in

default of payment of fine to further two years
S.I, while extending them the benefit of Section
382-B Cr.PC.

2. The case under Section 9 ( C ) CNSA was
registered against both the appellants/accused
in Police Station, Anti Narcotics Force,
Peshawar, vide FIR No.56 dated 20.08.2013, on
the report of Waqar Ahmed, Sub Inspector,
Police Station ANF, Peshawar, who, while
acting on a prior information about smuggling
of narcotics in vehicle No.WA-433/Islamabad
from tribal territory to Punjab via Motorway by
the appellants/accused, laid a picket near
Motorway Tool Plaza Peshawar; and, in the
meantime, the aforementioned _— vehicle
appeared from Peshawar side and was stopped
for checking. According to the FIR, out of the
two accused, who disclosed their names to the
complainant/S.I, Tariq Mehmood was on the
driving seat, while Imran Haider was occupying
the front seat. They, allegedly, further revealed
presence of narcotics in the secret cavity of

floor of the vehicle, which was opened and on
checking 59 packets of chars (Gardah), 13
packets of chars (Pukhta) and 17 packets of
opium in the shape of tikkis were recovered
wrapped in coloured plastic wrapper and
solution tape and also a packet of heroin, brown
colour, in white cloth and a plastic envelop were
recovered, which, on weighment, were found
70.800 kilograms chars (Garda), 15.600
kilograms chars (Pukhta), opium in packets of
1200/1200 grams, total weighing 20.400
kilogram and packet of heroin weighing 1
kilogram. The complainant/SI separated
samples of 10/10 grams from the recovered
contraband, which were sealed, and the
remaining contraband were also sealed in
separate sacks. The further search of the vehicle
led to recovery of registration book of the
vehicle in the name of Syed Mazhar Hussain,
which was taken into possession along with the
vehicle and contraband vide recovery memo
EXPW4/1; and the accused/appellants were

arrested, and murasila (EXPW4/2) was drafted
by the complainant/S.I, whereupon case was
registered vide FIR (EXPW4/1). The site plan
was prepared by the complainant/S.I; who also
dispatched the samples to the FSL, Peshawar,
which were received there on the following day
of the recovery i.e. 21.08.2013; and report of
the chemical examiner in respect of all the
samples was in the affirmative. After
completion of investigation, complete challan
against the accused/appellants was submitted
by the SHO P.S ANF, Peshawar.

3. On the receipt of complete challan in the
Court, the learned trial Court/Judge, Special
Court (CNS), Peshawar, framed formal charge
against both the accused/appellants under
Section9 (C) CNSA, 1997, to which the
accused/appellants pleaded not guilty, and
claimed trial.

4. In support of its case, the prosecution
produced as many as five PWs, including
complainant/S.I, Waqar Ahmed (PW.4), and

marginal witness of the recovery memo, Feroz
Khan S.J (PW.5); where-after, the prosecution
closed its evidence; and statements of the
accused/appellants were recorded under
Section 342 Cr.PC, wherein, they refuted
allegation of the prosecution, and also opted to
be examined on oath under Section 340 (2)
Cr.PC. Their statements were, accordingly,
recorded under Section 340 (2) Cr.PC; and they
also produced Mst. Rugia Kausar (DW3) and
Mst. Shama (DW.4). Thereafter, the learned trial
Court/Judge Special Court (CNS), Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa, Peshawar, rendered the
impugned judgment dated 03.12.2014; hence

appeal by both the appellants /accused.

5. Arguments of learned counsel for the
appellants/accused and Standing counsel for
ANF heard; and record perused.

6. During arguments, it was urged on
behalf of the appellants that they, according to
their statements on oath and also defence
evidence adduced by them, had _ visited

Peshawar for purchasing some house hold
articles from Karkhano market for marriage of
daughter of appellant, Tariq Mehmood; and that
they had hired the vehicle going to Islamabad
for Rs.1500/- and also that they had no
knowledge of presence of narcotics in the said
vehicle. The learned counsel for the appellants,
in support of these contentions referred to
2016 SCMR 806, 2016 SCMR 909, 2016 SCMR
707, 2014 SCMR 1165, PLD 2012 S.C 369,
PLD 2015 Peshawar 157, 2014 P.Cr.LJ 22
(Islamabad), 2016 P.Cr.L.J Note 79 (Sindh
(Hyderabad Bench), 2014 P.Cr.LJ 1295
(Sindh).

7. The appellants/accused, in other words,
admitted presence of the narcotics in the
vehicle and recovery of the same while they
were present in the vehicle. As such, there
would be a presumption of possession of illicit
articles under Section 29 of the CNSA, 1997,
unless and until the contrary was proved. In
order to prove the contrary, the

appellants/accused tried to discharge this
burden, but vainly; as, initially, they tried to
develop story of marriage of daughter of Tariq
Mehmood, appellant, and their visit to
Peshawar along with female DWs namely Mst.
Ruqia Kausar (DW.3)and Mst. Shama (DW4) for
purchase of articles from Karkhano market;
where-from, they hired the vehicle for
Rs.1500/- to Islamabad, after purchasing the
articles, but they were, allegedly, taken to the
Police Station, where they were falsely
implicated in the case. It was, however, not
made clear that when the appellants/accused
had come to Peshawar from Lahore, then why
they hired the vehicle going to Islamabad. They
also failed to prove their journey from Lahore to
Peshawar for the alleged purpose as they
produced no evidence like tickets etc for the
purpose. Apart from the undisputed time of
occurrence i.e. 0645 hours, when Karkhano
markets are admittedly,not yet open what to
speak of purchase of article and then returning

for return journey, the line of defence during
cross examination of the marginal witness
(PWS), whereby in his answer to a suggestion
from the defence, the PW denied that the
accused /appellants were waiting for
passenger’s vehicle on the road near Karkhano
Markets when the ANF officials came, asked
them about their presence in Karkhano Market
and later on took them to the Police Station and
that both the ladies were let free and the
accused were implicated in the case; clearly
contradicts statements of the accused and their
defence witnesses to the effect that after hiring
the vehicle to Islamabad on fixation of fare of
Rs.1500/-, they boarded the vehicle, and after
covering some distance in the vehicle, they
were taken to the Police Station, while
according to DW.4, the driver turned the
vehicle to an unknown place near the
motorway; where the recovery of huge quantity
of narcotics was made by the staff of ANF;
which, admittedly, neither had previous

acquaintance with the appellants/accused nor
any ill will or grudge for their false implication
in the case and substitution for the real culprits.
8. The prosecution, on the other hand,
brought overwhelming evidence on the record
to bring home charge of possession and
trafficking huge quantity of narcotics i.e. 70.800
kilograms chars (Garda), 15.600 kilograms
chars (Pukhta), 20.400 kilograms opium and 1
kilogram heroin. The recovery of narcotics was
not only proved through the testimony of
complainant/SI (PW4) and marginal witness
(PW.5), and witnesses to the safe custody of the
samples i.e. Constable Shakir Zaman (PW2) and
Ashfaq Hussain ASI (PW3); but also prompt
dispatch of the samples to the FSL on the
following day of the recovery; and positive
report of the FSL; which cannot be dislodged
by the mere fact that the PWs belonged to ANF,
as police officers/officials are as good witnesses
as any other witnesses, keeping in view facts
and circumstances of the case, unless malice

was proved against them, which was not even
alleged, let alone proved by the defence.
Likewise, the minor discrepancies in the
prosecution case, as pointed out by the defence,
would not be that much fatal for the case of
prosecution in the light of consistent and
confidence inspiring evidence of the
prosecution; which, certainly led to the
conclusion that the prosecution had proved
case against the appellants/accused, who were
accordingly awarded the sentence of life
imprisonment, which was the bare minimum
sentence the learned trial Court could award to
the appellants/accused, keeping in view huge
quantity of narcotics. The conviction of the
appellants/accused and _ sentence of life
imprisonment awarded to them, therefore, do
not suffer from any legal infirmity, which are
upheld; and appeal of the appellants dismissed,
accordingly.

Announced. . JUDGE
13.09.2017
(Ayub)

JUDGE
