-1-

JUDGMENT SHEET
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
MINGORA BENCH (DAR-UL-QAZA), SWAT
(Judicial Department)

1. Cr.A No. 448-M/2019

(Lal Zada QYorus The State and another)

Present: Mr. Jehangir Khan, Advocate for the appellant/
convict.

Mr. Haq Nawaz Khan, Assistant A.G. for State.

Muhammad Mushtaq Khan, Advocate for complainant.

2. Cr.A No. 470-M/2019

(Fayaz Ahmad Warsus Muhammad Salman and others)

Present: Muhammad Mushtaq Khan, Advocate for-the appellant/
complainant.

Mr. Haq Nawaz Khan, Assistant A.G. for State,
Respondents/accused in person.

3. Cr.R No, 102-M/2019
(Fayaz Ahmad Qorus The State and another)
Present: Muhammad Mushtaq Khan, Advocate for petitioner.

Mr. Haq Nawaz Khan, Assistant A.G. for State.

Mr. Jehangir Khan, Advocate for the respondent/
convict, :

Date of hearing: 10.06.2021
Date of announcement: 30.06.2021

JUDGMENT .

ISHTIAQ IBRAHIM, J.- Shahid Khan son of Sher
Rehman aged about 19/20 years resident of village
Gorathai, District Swat, who was a Suzuki driver,
left his house as routine on 13.11.2017 for his work
but thereafter went missing and did not return to his

home. His brother Fayaz Ahmad inquired about him

Tajamul/Ps*} ” SB: Hon'ble Mr. Justice Ishtlagq tbrahim
Hon'ble Mr. Justice Wigar Ahmad
-2-
from Arif, owner of the vehicle, who informed him
that Shahid Khan had taken out the vehicle for
plying at morning time and brought the same back at
20:00 ours whereafter he went to his house. He was
thoroughly searched in the area but could not be
traced out, therefore, complainant Fayaz Ahmad
(PW-1) in the company of his uncle Ghafoor Khan
went to P.S Ghaligay and lodged a report to this
effect vide Daily Diary No. 17 dated 15.11.2017
(Ex.PW-1/1). He further informed the police that
SIM Nos. 0342-0933117 and 0314-2372335 were in

use of his missing brother but his repeated calls on

_ the same contact numbers went unattended and cell

phone of his brother was thereafter switch off. The
complainant also stated in his report that they have

no enmity with any one.

Zz. Police initiated inquiry in the matter,
however, complainant again went to police station
on 18.11.2017 in the company of one Nasar Khan
and expressed his solid suspicion regarding the
present appellant Lal Zada aged about 32/33 years as
well as his acquitted co-accused Muhammad Salman
and Ikram Khan. He informed the local police that
his missing brother had friendly relations with

appellant Lal Zada, however, the relationship

Tajamulypse|

$B: Hon'ble Mr. Justice Ishtlaq Ibrahim
-3-
between them had become strained a few days back.
On the basis of above information received from the
complairiant, the present appellant was summoned to
police station who revealed during interrogation that
he and his co-accused named above had taken
Shahid Khan to orchard of one Afzal Khan situated
at Aboha where the co-accused caught hold of
Shahid Khan while he himself killed him through
blows of a hoe on his head and thereafter buried him

in a ditch.

3. Police took the appellant alongwith
complainant and other police contingents to the said
orchard from where dead body of Shahid Khan was
recovered on pointation of the appellant.
Complainant identified the dead body of his brother
and charged the present appellant and his acquitted
co-accused for the murder. ASHO Abdul Qahar
Khan (PW-11) arrested the appellant and reported
the matter against him and his other co-accused
through Murasila on the basis whereof FIR (Ex.PA)
was chalked out against the accused u/s 302/34 PPC.
It is noteworthy that a mobile phone of Rivo brand
with SIM No. 03331533646 (converted to Telenor)
was recovered from possession of the appellant at

the time of arrest.

Talamuyes|

‘SB: Hon'ble Mr. Justice Ishtlaq Ibrahim
Hon‘ble Mr, Justice Winar Ahmad
-4-
4. The dead body was sent to THC
Hospital Barikot for postmortem which was

conducted by Dr. Ikram Khan MO (PW-8). The

autopsy report (Ex.PW-8/1) is reproduced below:

Name: Shahid

Father Name: Sher Rehman

Cast: Afghani

Residence: Guratai Swat

Sex: Male

Age: 19/20 years

District: Swat

Body brought by: | Shah Khalid IHC PS

Ghalegay

Body identified by: Sher Rehman

Date and hour of Examination: 18.11.2017
at 11:45 P.M

Death: Approximately 72 hours before at

12:45 P.M
Dispatch of matter
to chemical examiner: 19.11.2017

Symptoms observed before death: Nil

Information furnished by police: © Blade/digger
(Kudal)

1. EXTERNAL APPEARANCE:

Condition of subject Stout emaciated,
decomposed, ete clothing, wounds, bruises,
position, size, nature: Thin lean victim with
off-white color qamees, completely covered in
mud due to burial stained with blood and brain
spilled on it having no shalwar on him (lying
on the side of the victim. Rigor mortis fully
developed with appearance of moralization and
having washer man feet/hands.

A. Stab wound to the head completely
penetrated into the cranial cavity through
parietal bone in between coronal stature
and lambdoidal stature in the shape of
inverted L shape in structure with cleanly
cut and inverted having some abrasion and
bruises seems at the side. The long length
of L measuring 3x3 inch in length and left
with one inch in width. The short tail of
measuring 2x3 in ches in length and depth

Tajamul/Ps* SB: Hon'ble Mr. Justice Ishtiag Ibrahim,
Hon‘ble Mr, Justice Wiaer Ahmad
Tajamul/Ps*

-5-

with 1.5 inch i in width, with the Portion of
brain spilled out.

B. Stab wound to head completely penetrated
into cranial cavity through occipital bone
below lambodical stature starting from
medial to lateral to nick. The size of the
stab wound measuring 1.5 x 2 inch in
length and depth with 0.5 inch in width
with the portion of brain spell out.

C. Stab wound to the head with temporal bone
exposed posteriorly to external auditory
meatus with clearly cut having regular
margin measuring 2 x 1 cm in length and
depth and 0.5 inch in width.

D. Laceration measuring 2 cm in length above
the left lateral eyebrow.

CRANIUM AND SPINAL CORD

Scalp, skull and vertebrae; membranes,

brain, spinal cord

A. Scalp completely tears at three places
(temporal, parietal, occipital areas)

B. Skull fracture at two places (parietal and
occipital bone)

C. Membrane tears and brain spilled out at
fracture sides.

THORAX

Walls, ribs and cartilages: Healthy

Pleurae: Healthy

Larynx and trachea: Healthy

Right lung: Healthy

Left lung: Healthy

Pericardium and heart: Healthy

Blood vessels: Healthy

ABDOMEN

Walls: Healthy

Peritoneum: Healthy

Mouth, pharynx and Esophagus. Healthy

Diaphragm: Healthy

Stomach and its contents: Healthy

Pancreas: Healthy

Small intestine and their contents Healthy

Large intestine and their contents Healthy

Liver Healthy
Spleen Healthy

Kidneys Healthy

Hon'ble Mr. Justice Ishtlaq {brahim
Hon'ble Mr, Justice Wiaar Ahmad
Bladder . Healthy
Organs of generation

External and internal Healthy
Muscles, bones and joints Healthy

REMARKS BY MEDICAL OFFICER: |

The cause of death is head injury and excessive
damage to brain (vital organ) and brain spilled out
of cranium cavity.

Probable time that elapsed:

Between injury and death: Less than one

hour approx..

Between death and postmortem:
: - Approximately

before 72 hours

or later.
Postmortem started: Nil
End: Nil

3 Acquitted co-accused Muhammad ,

Salman and Ikram Khan were also arrested on the
same night. Mobile phone Nokia having SIM No.
0341-1916299 was recovered from accused Ikram
Khan whereas Samsung mobile phone with SIM No.
0341-7704024 was taken into possession from co-
accused Muhammad Salman. During the course of
investigation, I.O secured blood stained earth from
the place of occurrence and also took into possession
blood stained clothes of the deceased. Four days
police custody of all the accused was allowed on
19.11.2017. The appellant made pointation of the
place of occurrence to I.O in presence of witnesses
and also led him to heap of paddy straw in his field

wherein he had concealed the hue with which he had

Tajamut/Ps+| SB: Hon'ble Mr. Justice [shtiag [brahim
Hon'ble Mr, Justice Wiaar Ahmad
7
killed the deceased and thereafter buried him in the
plums orchard. Police recovered the said hoe stained
with blood on his pointation and secured the same
through pointation-cum-recovery memo Ex.PW-6/2
besides photographs of the proceedings so
conducted were also made which are available on
file. Mobile phone Nokia model x1-01 with SIM
Nos. 0342-0933117 and 0314-2372335 had been
taken away by appellant which was recovered from
a shelf of bathroom of his house on his pointation.
Recovery memo to this effect is Ex.PW-6/3 whereas
photographs thereof are Ex.P21 to Ex.P28. The co-
accused were produced before the Judicial
Magistrate for further custody on 23.11.2017,
however, the request was turned down and they were
sent to judicial lockup. On the same day the present
appellant volunteered to confess his guilt, hence, his
confessional statement was recorded which is

available on record as Ex.PW-13/2.

6. After winding up the process of
investigation, Sessions Case No. 52/7 of 2018 was
registered against the accused on submission of
report u/s 173, Cr.P.C for their joint trial. They were
formally charge-sheeted for the offence but they did

not plead guilty and opted to face the trial. Thirteen

Tojamul/Ps|

‘SB: Hon’ble Mr. Justice Ishtiag Ibrahim
Hon‘ble Mr. Justice Wigar Ahmad
Tajamules|

-8-
PWs appeared in the witness box and recorded their
statements in ‘support of allegations against the
accused whereas the remaining 13 PWs were
abandoned. When examined u/s 342, Cr.P.C, all the
accused stated to have been involved in a false case,
however, they neither opted to be examined on oath
in terms of section 340(2), Cr.P.C nor they produced

any evidence in their defence.

Z. On conclusion of trial, the learned trial
Court vide judgment dated 01.10.2019 convicted the
present appellant Lal Zada u/s 302(b) PPC and
sentenced him to undergo imprisonment for life as |
tazir. He was also burdened with payment of ©
Rs.500,000/- to legal heirs of the deceased as
compensation or to suffer further six months S.I in
case of default thereof. Benefit of section 382-B,
Cr.P.C was extended to him. The learned trial Court
acquitted co-accused Muhammad Salman and Ikram
Khan through the same judgment by giving them the

benefit of doubt.

Appeilant Lal Zada has preferred this
appeal against the judgment of trial Court whereas
complainant has challenged the above referred

quantum of sentence through the connected Cr.R No.

$B: Hon’ble Mr, Justice ishtlag Ibrahim
‘Hon’ble Mr Justice Wiasr Ahmad
-9-

102-M/2019 with the prayer for enhancement. He has

~ also assailed acquittal of co-accused through the

connected Cr.A No. 470-M/2019. All the cases,
being off-shoots of the same verdict of the trial
Court, are decided through this judgment.

. oN
8. We have paid our anxious consideration

to arguments of learned counsels for the parties

including the learned A.A.G. representing the State

and perused the record with their able assistance.

9. We would first take up the case of
appellant Lal Zada for discussion. He has been
held guilty of the charge by learned trial Court. As
per postmortem report, a young boy of 19/20 years
has been killed during nocturnal hours whose dead
body was recovered from a plum orchard after five
days of his murder. It means that the occurrence
was unseen one and thereafter no one had taken ©
notice of the buried corpse in the orchard as it had
not been a formal grave, the murderer had covered
up the dead body to conceal his crime. Keeping in
view the above stated scenario of the case,
recourse to circumstantial evidence on record was
the only option with the trial Court to adjudge

culpability of the appellant in the present case and

Tajamul/Ps* |

SB: Hon'ble Mr. Justice Ishtlag Ibrahim
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Wiaar Ahmad
Talarmul/Ps*

-10-
so is the situation before this Court in exercise of

its appellate jurisdiction.

10. Main evidence available on record
against the appellant is in shape of his inculpatory
confession before the Judicial Magistrate and
recovery of dead body as well a hoe/blade digger on
his pointation which was used in commission of
murder. Before making further discussion on the
evidentiary value of judicial confession made by
appellant, we deem it appropriate to reproduce the

same below.

ete WOLF of BLE be IH Vk
vw LP ale ed wre 3) A etl sess
UG id etl see 2h loin ory’
AST311.2017 sur be LSS eid Ut
wt SLT RUHL Supe Ses fee
LPT RUHL AI wi ST tua L
sar BU Ne See LESS Soi
(uA ier ,Er ta erly t
VR Lictie i Loei We Sit
LtKnletGLiuy Lb aot F
Fre eu py ene 2 sL AS ec Byul
EF gots od wt F Mig. yeti nit. ef
EL ALIS SAS KA ai hoe ital
SFL tA et tut X eS WF 4 09
abs tye tie Fike ae
WF Lt yess cule SurBern Suds
CAFS SA bg Sutce bh ott bab UF

$8: Hon’ble Mr. Justice Ishtlaq Ibrahim.
Hon'ble Mr. Justice Wigar Ahmad
Tajamnul/es* |

-11-

Bete be be Calcd uty gut
eke

il. It is apparent from perusal of the above
statement that appellant has confessed his guilt by
giving detailed description of the entire episode in a
natural manner. Learned counsel for the appellant
during the course: of his arguments attacked
genuineness of the confession mainly on the ground
of delay. He argued that belated recording of the
confession by appellant after remaining in police
custody for five days connotes his torture and
inducement by police for obtaining statement of
their own choice. According to him, the confession
being involuntary and result of torture, was wrongly
relied upon by trial court for conviction of the
appellant. Recording of the confession in the present
case with delay of four days could not be denied but
delay per se ‘in each and every case is not a
conclusive proof of police torture upon accused for
obtaining his judicial confession. Each case has its
own facts and circumstances which are required to
be considered for reaching at a just conclusion.
When the Court forms an opinion that confession of

an accused inspires confidence and is supported by

SB: Hon'ble Mr, Justice Ishtiaq (brahim:
-12-
circumstantial evidence on record then "such
statement can be regarded as true and voluntary
confession irrespective of the fact that the same was
either recorded with delay or retracted by accused.
Judging the confessional statement of the appellant
in the present case on the touchstone of the above
criteria laid down by superior Courts, his narrations
before the Judicial Magistrate do not appear to be
result of torture, coercion or inducement more
particularly when no evidence on record is available
to suggest that accused was tortured before

recording of his confession. Statement of the

. appellant not only appears to be true but same is

TajamuyPse|

duly corroborated by circumstantial evidence on
record, therefore, retraction thereof by appellant
during his examination ws 342, Cr.P.C and the
allegations he had levelled against police while
replying Q. 24 of the said statement are nothing
more than his endeavours to save his skin. Most
important aspect of the present case is that the dead
body had already been recovered on pointation of
the appellant and that evidence was of pivotal
importance in support of the allegation against him,
therefore, there was indeed no need for the police to

strain every nerve to procure his false confession

‘SB: Hon'ble Mr. Justice Ishtiag (brahim
Hon'ble Mr. Justice Wioar Ahmad =”
Talamul/Ps*

-13-

through torture. In the mentioned circumstances
when otherwise confession of the appellant is true
and voluntary and the Magistrate while recording the
confession had observed all legal and codal
formalities, objection of the learned counsel with
regard to delay holds no water. The august Supreme
Court of Pakistan held in the case of Syed Sharifudin
Pirzada v. Sohbat Khan (PLD 1972 SC 363) that no
hard and fast rule can certainly be placed about
period within which confessional statement of the
accused ought to be recorded during the course of
investigation. This view was relied by the august
Supreme Court in the case titled “Nabi Bakhsh and
another Vs. The State and another” reported as 1999

SCMR 1972 wherein it was observed that:

9. We have carefully perused the record and
considered arguments prevailed before us by
learned counsel for the parties. It may be seen
that prosecution case mainly hinges upon
confessional statements of appellant Nabi
Bakhsh and petitioner Ghulam Haider, which.
is supplemented by medical evidence,
recovery of crime weapon and other
circumstantial factors. Undisputedly the
appellant and petitioner were arrested on 19-
11-1990. Recovery of crime weapon at the
instance of appellant Nabi Bakhsh was
effected on the same day in presence of P.W.3
Abdul Ghafoor and one Muhammad. Yousaf.
Therefore, in this context, pivotal question
requiring consideration would be whether
delay of 6/7 days in recording confessional
statements was fatal and affects its validity or

SB: Hon’ble Mr, Justice Ishtlaq Ibrahim.
-14-

admissibility. It may be seen that Superior
Courts while dealing with this aspect have
invariably observed that delay in recording
confessional statements by itself is not
sufficient to affect its validity. No hard and
fast rule can certainly be placed about period
within which confessional statement of the
accused ought to be recorded during the
course of investigation. No doubt long period
of detention in police custody is looked with
suspicion and tends to cast doubts about
voluntary nature of such statement. However,
Courts are obligated to properly scan and
thoroughly scrutinize the truthfulness and
voluntary basis of making confession before
the Magistrate. :

12. As regards retraction of the confession
by appellant during his examination u/s 342, Cr.P.C,
retracted confession, as observed by Hon’ble apex

Court in the case of Nizam-ud-Din Vs. Riaz and

another (2010 SCMR 457), if found truthful and

confidence-inspiring and also having qualified the
test of voluntariness, can be used for conviction
without looking for any other sort of corroboration.
Since, confession of appellant in the present case
qualifies the above standard, therefore, we cannot
discard the same on the sole ground that it was later
on retracted by appellant. Further reliance is placed
on Shaukat Ali Vs. The State and other (PLD 2019
S.C 577) wherein the well settled principle was re-

affirmed in the following words.

Tajamul/Ps*

$8: Hon'ble Mr. Justice Ishtiaq Ibrahim
Talamul/Ps* |

-15-

Retracted confession could form basis for

conviction if found voluntary and truthful.
13. Confession of the appellant gets
corroboration from medical evidence according to
which the deceased was done to death through stab
injuries on his head. According to confession, the
appellant hit the deceased on his head with a hoe
which has been recovered on his pointation from
heap of paddy straw in his field. Keeping in view the
seats and dimension of injuries sustained by
deceased, infliction of the same injuries through a
hoe appeals to prudent mind, hence, there is no
conflict between confession of the appellant and
post-mortem report. Thus, the confession, though
retracted but is backed by strong corroboration from
independent source, can safely be relied upon for

conviction of the appellant.

13. The most important evidence on record
which connects the present appellant with murder of
deceased is recovery of the dead body on his
pointation. Obviously, the deceased was secretly
killed and thereafter buried in a ditch at night time.
As per confession, the appellant all alone had
committed the crime and left the spot with the belief

that he had left no clue of his involvement in the

‘SB: Hon‘ble Mr, Justice Ishtiaq Ibrahim.
' -16-
murder, however, complainant disclosed his
satisfaction before police regarding involvement of
the appellant in missing of his brother being his
close friend. When interrogated by police, he
admitted his guilt and led the police to the place
where he had buried the deceased and the dead body
was recovered on his pointation. It means that only
the appellant was in knowledge of the place where
he had buried the dead body after committing his
murder. Knowledge of the appellant with regard to
burial of dead body is of vital importance and so is
the mode of recovery thereof on his pointation
which is admissible in evidence under Article 40 of

Qanun-e-Shahadat Order 1984 which reads:

40. How much of information received from
accused may be proved. When any fact is
deposed to as discovered in consequence of
information received from a person accused of
any offence, in the custody of a police-officer,
so much of such information, whether it
amounts to a confession or not, as relates
distinctly to the fact thereby discovered, may be
proved.

No doubt, Courts are required to take
care and caution while relying upon circumstantial
evidence, however, keeping in view the fact that a
dead body has been recovered on pointation of the
appellant, fabrication of the said evidence for

enroping the appellant in a false case is totally

Tajamul/Ps* |

$8: Hon'ble Mr. Justice Ishtlag [brahim
Hon’ble Mr, Justice Wiaar Ahmad
-17-

excluded. The I.O has also recovered the hoe on his
pointation with which he had killed the deceased and
similarly he led the 1.0 to his house and made
pointation of mobile phone of the deceased which he
had taken from him after committing his murder. The
mentioned recoveries and discoveries on pointation
of the appellant have been supported by complainant
Fayaz Ahmad (PW-1), Abdul Qahar ASHO (PW-11),
Shah Khalid IHC (PW-9), LO Mutabar Mian S.1
(PW-7) and constable Said Umar (PW-6). Thus, we
do not feel any hesitation in relying upon the above
links of circumstantial evidence which are making an
unbroken chain and abundantly connects the
appellant with the murder of deceased. Guidance is
sought from Khan Muhammad and others Vs. The

State (2011 SCMR 705). The august Supreme Court

of Pakistan while attributing credit to circumstantial

_ evidence of the same nature, observed that:

The evidentiary value of the recovery of dead
body at the pointation of the appellant cannot
be undermined on any valid ground. In
Hakim Ali v. The State (1971 SCMR 412) a
statement of the accused leading to recovery
of incriminating articles was found to be a
good piece of evidence of corroboration. In
that case the petitioner/accused had taken the
Investigating Officer to.a field and "brought
out the decapitated head of the deceased,
wrapped up in the loi." In Sh, Muhammad
Amjad v. The State (PLD 2003 SC 704), it was
observed that "the Banglow in question was in

Tajamul/Ps*

SB: Hon‘ble Mr. Justice Ishtiag Ibrahim
Hon'ble Mr. Justice Wiaar Ahmad
(NLR 1994 Criminal 399), having almost identical
facts, this Court took into account recovery of dead
body on pointation of accused and relied upon his

retracted judicial confession recorded after 2/3 days

-18-

possession of the appellant from where the
dead body was ‘recovered. It was also:
established by an unimpeachable evidence
that recoveries of dead body, car or other
articles were made on the lead, provided by
the appellant. All above pieces of evidence
under Article 40 ibid are admissible and were
proved by conclusive evidence. It was
accordingly held that all such pieces of
circumstantial evidence when combined
together provided strong chain of
circumstances leading to the irresistible
conclusion that it was the appellant who had
killed the deceased."

In the case of Mir Azam Vs. The State

of his arrest by observing that:

14.
appellant had called the deceased to the field through

a phone call at night time as is evident from CDR

It rather, in the circumstances, having been
totally corroborated on very material
particular by the recovery of dead body from
the premises where the appellant resides at his
own pointation and the medico-legal evidence
confirming the happening of the murder in
the manner as described in the statement has
been rightly believed, taken into consideration
and relied upon as a satisfactory proof of the
guilt of the convict notwithstanding the fact
that he remained in police custody for 2/3
days before making the statement.

Keeping in view the facts that the

Tajamuljes|

‘$B: Hon'ble Mr. Justice Ishtlag Ibrahim:
-19-
data; on his arrival he took him to plum orchard and
killed him by giving blows with a hoe on his head, it
appears that all the above acts were performed by

him alone as he had got sufficient time for achieving

his evil goal without any interruption. Discovery of

the dead body on his pointation and recovery of
mobile phone of the deceased on his information
from his house were sufficient to prove his guilt
more particularly when he has brought no
exculpatory evidence on the record to create a slight
doubt regarding his involvement in the occurrence.
The august Supreme Court of Pakistan in the case
titled Billmoria Alias Muhammad Hussain Vs. The
State (PLD 1958 S.C 1) discussed in detail liability
of accused in the said case in light of circumstantial

evidence by holding that:

Thus, practically everything which was
robbed from the' murdered man _ was
recovered from Billmoria's possession on the
fourth day following the discovery of the
crime. This is a very strong circumstance
favouring the belief that he was the person
who removed these things, following the
murder, and the natural inference is that he
was directly concerned in the murder. When
it is also found that he had concealed, along
with some of the deceased's goods, a weapon
of the exact type with which the murder was
in all probability committed, the inference
becomes almost irresistible on the basis of a
complete chain of circumstances, that he
himself committed the crime.

Tajamul/Ps*

SB: Hon'ble Mr. Justice Ishtlaq Ibrahim
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Wigar Abmad
-20-

The circumstances do not require that it
should be supposed that more than one person
took part in the crime: All that appears from
the evidence could easily have been the work
of a single man, provided he had a sufficient
interval of time to carry it out without
interruption. Accordingly, the facts
established must be held to constitute a strong
case of murder and robbery against Billmoria_-
upon which, had the trial been by jury, a
verdict of guilty could reasonably have been
demanded, in the absence of rebuttal. That
rebuttal could not successfully be founded
upon any mere hypothesis, in view of the
strength of the case established against the
accused. Such a hypothesis was put forward
before us by the learned counsel appearing for
the appellant, viz. that Billmoria might have
received all the things which were later
recovered from his possession from some
person who had actually committed the
murder, of which Billimoria was himself
innocent. It was admitted, however, that in the
face of the recovery of the axe from the same
place of concealment as certain property
which had been robbed from the deceased, it
was difficult to advance this hypothesis as a
complete reply to the prosecution case with
any confidence. The chain of circumstances in
this case is so strong that in order to create a
reasonable doubt regarding the natural
conclusion that the murder was committed by
Billmoria, it was necessary for him to
establish exculpatory circumstances of a
concrete kind, and in the absence of either
proof or suggestion by him that he received
the goods from another, in a manner
unconnected with the murder, it is difficult to
conceive of any circumstance which might
have the effect of creating such a doubt,
except perhaps an allegation supported by
reliable proof, that at the time when the
murder was committed, Billmoria was in
some other place. There is no such allegation,
and as has been seen, Billmoria led no
evidence in his defence at the trial.

Tajamul/Ps*

SB: Hon'ble Mr. Justice Ishtiag tbrahim
oe
IS. . Learned counsel for the appellant has
challenged the evidentiary value of the above
mentioned recoveries and discoveries mainly on the
ground that police have not associated any
independent witness with the said process and posed
police officials to the recovery memos in violation of
section 103, Cr.P.C. No doubt, attesting witnesses of
the recovery memos in the present case are mostly
police officials, however, it has been repeatedly held
by august Supreme Court of Pakistan that police are
as good as other private witnesses, therefore, their
testimony could not be discarded on the ground of _
their status as employees of police department when
otherwise they have supported the recoveries
through truthful statements and no evidence is there
to suggest their ill-will towards the appellant. It is
also settled principle that compliance of section 103,
Cr.P.C is necessary when search of a house or place
is conducted by police for recovery of something and
not in the cases when the recovery is made on
pointation of accused. In this regard we would refer
the judgment of Hon’ble apex Court in the case of
Muhammad Akbar Vs. The State (1995 SCMR 693)

wherein it was held that:

Tajamul/Ps*

‘SB: Hon‘bfe Mr, Justice ishtiag Ibrahim
Tajamnut/ess|

-22-

The objection raised by the learned counsel
with regard to the violation of the provisions
of section 103, Cr.P.C. by not joining the two
respectable of the locality to witness the
recovery is devoid of force. In the instant case,
neither search warrants were issued by the
Magistrate for the search of the house of the
petitioner nor the police had searched the
house/place of its own. The petitioner himself
led the police to his house and pointed the
place wherefrom the gun was recovered.
Section 103, Cr.P.C. would apply to a case
where the police conducts search of the
house/place to recover a thing for which
search is to be made and not to a case where
anything is to be discovered in consequence of
the information given by or on the pointation
of the accused. The recovery, to be made on
the pointation of the accused is relevant under
Article 40 of the Qanun-e-Shahadat, 1984.
The association of the two respectable
inhabitants of the locality is not required in a
case where the accused himself leads the
police to a particular place and the thing is
recovered on his information and/or
pointation.

16. Regarding the quantum of sentence
which is disputed in the connected revision petition
filed by complainant for enhancement of the
appellant’s sentence from life imprisonment to
death, it is an admitted fact that there is no eye
witness of the occurrence and prosecution has based
its case against the appellant wholly on
circumstantial evidence. There are _also - slight
variations in the statements of PWs especially of
complainant and S.H.O of the police station with

regard to timings of recovery of dead body as well as

SB: Hon'ble Mr, Justice ishtiaq Ibrahim.
-23-

. registration of Murasila. Though the said disparities

are not potential enough to damage the entire
prosecution case, however, the same have diluted the
charge against the appellant to some extent and can
be counted towards the quantum of sentence for safe
administration of justice. In addition, complainant in
his report has mentioned no motive behind the
occurrence. The appellant in his confessional
statement has disclosed that the deceased had
abandoned to give him company, therefore, he made |
a plan for his murder. ‘Though the deceased was a
borderline teenager but keeping in view his
physique, as apparent from his photograph Ex.P-19,
he does not appear to be a subtle youngster. His
separation from the appellant and his indifferent
behavior towards him was not a matter of life and
death for the appeliant $0 much so that to plan his
murder extreme anger. It appears that something had
happened between the appellant and deceased prior
to the occurrence which had prompted the appellant
to commit his murder but the same reason for
commission of the offence has not been brought on
record. No doubt, absence of motive or failure of
prosecution to prove the motive setup in the FIR

would not damage the case against an accused when

Tajamul/Ps*|

SB: Hon’ble Mr, Justice Ishtiag Ibrahim.
Hon'ble Mr. Justice Wigar Ahmad
Tajamut/est|

-24-

otherwise evidence on record is sufficient to prove

his guilt, however, this deficiency on the part of

prosecution can be considered for mitigating the

sentence. Wisdom is drawn from a recent judgment

of the august Supreme Court of Pakistan in the case

titled Ghulam Murtaza Vs. The State (2021 SCMR

149) wherein findings of the High Court with regard

to absence of motive as mitigating circumstance

were approved by holding that:

Vs. The State (NLR 2000 Criminal 188), It was

observed by Hon’ble apex Court in the said

4. We have observed that there is lack of
motive in the case in hand and what happened
prior to the scene of occurrence or what
prompted the appellant to take away the life
of the deceased-Mst. Saima Bibi are the
circumstances which have rightly been
considered by the Courts below as mitigating
circumstances and thus, the appellant has
rightly been dealt with by the Courts below.

Further reliance is placed on Falak Sher

judgment that:

17.

Muhammad Salman and Ikram Khan by trial Court

In the overall circumstances of the case, where

‘motive has become suspect and where the

prosecution version _— suffers from
inconsistencies other than of a fatal character,
it appears proper not to resort to the death
penalty, touching the guilt of the accused.

Regarding acquittal of co-accused

SB: Hon’ble Mr. Justice Ishttaq Ibrahim
Hon‘ble Mr, Justice Wiger Ahmad
-25-
through the same judgment, being a blind murder
case, they were initially associated with the

investigation but after pointation of dead body by

_ appellant Lal Zada and his confessional statement,

nothing has been brought on record to show their

complicity with the crime. Thus, they were rightly

_ acquitted of the charge and the impugned judgment

to this extent does not call for any interference.

18. Having regard to what is established in

the case against appellant/convict Lal Zada in light
of the above discussion and the principles deducible
from the cases cited above, we are satisfied that the
appellant has been rightly convicted for the offence
of murder and the sentence of life imprisonment
awarded to him by trial Court would meet the ends
of justice in circumstances of the case. Resultantly,
this appeal preferred by him against his conviction

and sentence, being devoid of merits, is accordingly

' dismissed. The connected crR No. 102-M/2019 is

dismissed and prayer of the complainant for
enhancement of the sentence is turned down for the
afore-mentioned reasons in Para-17 above. The order

of trial Court directing the appellant to pay

- compensation of Rs.500,000/- shall remain intact.

and in case of non-payment of compensation he shall

Tajsmuy/ese|

SB: Hon'ble Mr. Justice ishtlag Ibrahim
‘Hon’ble Mr. Justice Wigar Ahmad
-26-
suffer further six months S.I. Benefit. of section
382-B, CrP.C is extended to him. The connected
Cr.A No. 470-M/2019, being devoid of merits, is

also dismissed accordingly.

Announced. |
Dt: 30.06. 2021)

Wialoy

Tajamul/Ps* SB: Hon'ble Mr. Justice Ishtiag Ibrahim
Hon'ble Mr. Justice Wiaer Ahmad
