THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
BANNU BENCH.

[Judicial Department].

Cr.A No. 151-B of 2011

Nagqibullah
Ys.
The State

JUDGMENT

Date of hearing 05.12.2017

Appellant-Petitioner: | Nqib Ullah By Noor Zada
Khan Ahmadzai, Advocate.

Respondent : State By Shahid Hameed Qureshi.
Addl: AG.
Others By Muhammad Anwar

Khan Maidad Khel, Advocate.

SHAKEEL AHMAD, J.--- Through the instant appeal,

the appellant Nagqibullah s/o Kazim Khan has assailed

the judgment dated 28.06.2011, passed by the learned

Sessions Judge, Bannu, whereby the respondent /

accused Shah Alam s/o Umar Din was acquitted of the

charges after a full dressed trial, in case FIR No. 179

dated 29.10.2006 registered U/Ss-302/324/148/149

PPC, PS, Haved, Bannu.

(D.B)Justice Qalandar Ali Khan and Justice Shakeel Ahmad
2. The facts of the prosecution case as set-

forth in the FIR (Ex.PW-3/1) are that Gul Wali/PW-8

on 29.10.2006 at 16:45 hours reported the matter to

Abbas Khan ASI/PW-2 in injured condition along-with

dead body of his brother namely-Kazim Khan in

Emergency Ward of Civil Hospital Bannu and stated

that on the eventful day he along-with his deceased

brother namely-Kazim Khan and Shah Baraz/PW-7

were sitting in their clinic, meanwhile, at 15:45 hours,

the accused Shah Alam duly armed with .30 bore pistol,

Amratullah and two others sons of Malik Jan and Malik

Jan, armed with Kalashni-kovs, came to the spot and

fired from their respective guns with intention to kill

the complainant party, as a result of the firing of the

accused, the complainant party while coming out of the

clinic, Kazim Khan was hit and fell down on the ground,

Shah Baraz/PW-7 escaped unhurt, whereas, the

complainant also sustained injuries by unknown means.

(D.B)Justice Qalandar Ali Khan and Justice Shakeel Ahmad
After commission of the offence, the accused decamped

from the spot, when they attended the injured Kazim

Khan, he succumbed to his injuries. Motive as alleged

in the FIR is dispute over the landed property. The

occurrence was witnessed by Shah Baraz and

Kiramatullah besides the complainant.

3. It is pertinent to mention here that in

earlier round, the co-accused namely-Arifullah,

Hamedullah and Malak Jan were put to trial and they

were acquitted of the charges vide judgment dated

14.7.2010, while respondent Shah Alam, and

Amratullah were declared as proclaimed offenders.

4. After arrest, supplementary challan was

submitted against the accused Shah Alam. After

compliance of Section.265-C Cr.P.C, formal charge

was framed against accused on 24.01.2011 to which he

pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. In order to prove

its case, the prosecution produced as many as eleven

(D.B)Justice Qalandar Ali Khan and Justice Shakeel Ahmad
witnesses, the gist of their respective deposition is high-

lighted hereinbelow. However, statement of Suhail

Khan/PW-7 recorded in earlier trial was transposed.

5. Muhammad Akram appeared as PW-1 and

stated that he escorted the dead body of Kazim Khan

deceased and injured Gul Wali along-with their injury-

sheets and inquest reports to the Doctor for PM and

medicolegal examination, respectively. After

examination the Doctor handed-over PM report, blood-

stained garments of the deceased as well as medicolegal

report of the injured.

6. Abbas Khan ASI appeared as PW-2, he

reduced the report of the complainant into writing in

shape of murasila Ex.PW.2/1, prepared injury sheet of

complainant Ex.PW-2/2 and injury-sheet of deceased

Kazim Khan Ex.PW-2/3, his inquest report Ex.PW.2/4.

7. Dr.Bashir Hussain Shah appeared as pW-3

stated that he examined the injured Dr.Gul Wali Khan,

(D.B)Justice Qalandar Ali Khan and Justice Shakeel Ahmad
he also conducted PM examination of the dead body of

Kazim Khan.

8. Mir Sardar SHO appeared as PW-4 and

stated that, he arrested the accused Shah Alam on

28.11.2010 and submitted supplementary  challan

against him on 02.12.2010.

9. Sher Muhammad retired SI appeared as

PW-3 and stated that on receipt of murasila he

incorporated it into FIR Ex.PW-3-A/1.

10. Abdul Majid ASI/PW-4 stated that he is

marginal witness to the recovery memo: Ex.PW-4-A/1,

vide which the I.O secured blood-stained earth from the

spot, packed and sealed into parcel No.1 and one .30

bore pistol P-1 along-with empty magazine, one empty

of .30 bore P-2 along-with a piece of bullet P-3. He is

also marginal witness to the memo: Ex.PW-4-A/2 vide

which the I.O secured blood through cotton from the

place of injured Gul Wali packed and sealed it in parcel

(D.B)Justice Qalandar Ali Khan and Justice Shakeel Ahmad
No-4, recovery memo: Ex.PW-4-A/3 vide which the

1.0 took into possession blood-stained garments of the

deceased Kazim Khan having corresponding cut marks.

11. Muhammad Ajmal (PW-5) stated that he

was entrusted with warrant of arrest issued U/S-204

Cr.P.C against accused Shah Alam, Malik Jan,

Amratullah and Hamedullah. He endorsed the warrant

Ex.PW-5/1 to Ex.PW-5/4. He also took the

proclamation notices issued U/S-87 Cr.P.C against the

afore-mentioned accused Ex.PW-5/5 to Ex.PW-5/8.

12. Abdul Aziz ASI/PW-6 stated that after

receipt of copy of FIR, he proceeded to the spot and

investigated the case, prepared the site-plan Ex.PW-6/1,

and the recovery memos: effected recovery of .30 bore

pistol. Three empty chargers, one empty of .30 bore and

a piece of bullet from near the place of deceased.

(D.B)Justice Qalandar Ali Khan and Justice Shakeel Ahmad
13. Dr.Shah Baraz/PW-7 , eye-witness of the

occurrence, he supported the instance of the

complainant/PW-8.

14. Gul Wali complainant appeared as PW-8

and narrated the story as disclosed in the murasila

Ex.PW-2/1, subsequently, incorporated into FIR

Ex.PW-3/1.

15. Ghulam Muhammad SI /PW-9 stated that

he is well conversant with the hand-writing and

signature of the then ASI Nabi Shah, PS, Haved Bannu

and verified the content of EX.PW-9/1 and Ex.PW-9/2,

to be in his hand writing and duly signed by him.

16. Suhail Khan/PW-10 stated that he had

identified the dead body of the deceased before the

police as well as before the Doctor.

17. After closure of prosecution’s evidence,

statement of accused was recorded U/S-342 Cr.P.C

(D.B)Justice Qalandar Ali Khan and Justice Shakeel Ahmad
wherein he denied the allegations as set-forth by the

prosecution, but declined to be examined on Oath or to

produce defence witness.

18. On the conclusion of trial, vide judgment

dated 28.06.2011, the learned Sessions Judge, Bannu,

acquitted the accused of the charge, hence, this appeal.

19. The learned counsel for the appellant

contended that the respondent / accused has specifically

been named as offender in the FIR for committing

murder of deceased Kazim Khan and causing injuries to

the complainant; that the role of respondent is

distinguishable from the role of acquitted co-accused;

that after commission of offence, the accused remained

at large for quiet sufficient time and was declared as

proclaimed  offender,viz-a-viz recovery of one

discharged empty of .30 bore along-with pistol of the

same bore and positive FSL report of Fire-arm Expert

Ex.PW-6/5; that the version of the complainant, site-

(D.B)Justice Qalandar Ali Khan and Justice Shakeel Ahmad
plan and medicolegal report and PM report, are placed

in juxta position, are consistent inter-alia. He lastly

contended that the PWs were cross-examined at length

but no dent could be caused in their statements and

prayed for setting-aside the impugned judgment.

20. Conversely, the learned counsel

representing the respondent argued that the co-accused

namely-Arifullah, Hamedullah and Malik Jan were

acquitted by the learned Additional Sessions Judge-I

Bannu vide judgment dated 14.7.2010 and the role

attributed to the respondent and acquitted co-accused

are one and the same; that the prosecution miserably

failed to prove that the recovered pistol belonged to the

respondent; that abscondence is not a proof of guilt of

the accused as the people abscond out of fear to be

killed in retaliation; that criteria of interference in the

judgment of acquittal is not the same, as against

involving conviction. He lastly contended that the

(D.B)Justice Qalandar Ali Khan and Justice Shakeel Ahmad
10

prosecution miserably failed to prove the guilt of the

accused beyond a ray of doubt; therefore, he was

rightly acquitted by the learned trial court.

21. The learned Additional Advocate General

representing the State supported the contentions of the

learned counsel for respondent.

22. This is an appeal against acquittal as argued by

the learned counsel for the respondent and rightly so. The

scope of interference in appeal against acquittal is most

narrow and limited because in acquittal the presumption of

innocence is significantly added to the cardinal rule of

criminal jurisprudence. The court is always slow in

interfering with an acquittal judgment, unless it is shown to

be perverse, passed in gross violation of law, suffering from

errors of grave misreading or non-reading of evidence on

record. The criteria of interference in the judgment of

acquittal is not as against cases involving a conviction. This

(D.B)Justice Qalandar Ali Khan and Justice Shakeel Ahmad
11

is the consistent view of the superior courts in plethora of

judgments, the dicta are:-

“Bashir Ahmad v. Fida Hussain and 3 others

(2010 SCMR 495), Noor Mali Khan v. Mir Shah

Jehan and another (2005 PCr.LJ 352), Imtiaz

Asad v. Zain-ul-Abidin and another (2005

PCr.LJ 393), Rashid Ahmed v. Muhammad

Nawaz and others (2006 SCMR 1152), Barkat

Ali v. Shaukat Ali and others (2004 SCMR 249),

Mulazim Hussain v. The State and another

(2010 PCr.LJ 926), Muhammad Tasweer v.

Hafiz Zulkarnain and 2 others (PLD 2009 SC

53), Farhat Azeem v. Asmat ullah and 6 others

(2008 SCMR 1285), Rehmat Shah and 2 others v.

Amir Gul and 3 others (1995 SCMR 139), The

State v. Muhammad Sharif and 3 others (1995

SCMR 635), Ayaz Ahmed and another v. Dr.

Nazir Ahmed and another (2003 PCr.LJ 1935),

(D.B)Justice Qalandar Ali Khan and Justice Shakeel Ahmad
12

Muhammad Aslam v. Muhammad Zafar and 2

others (PLD 1992 SC 1), Allah Bakhsh and

another v. Ghulam Rasool and 4 others (1999

SCMR 223), Najaf Saleem v. Lady Dr. Tasneem

and others (2004 YLR 407), Agha Wazir Abbas

and others v. The State and others (2005 SCMR

1175), Mukhtar Ahmed vy. The State (1994

SCMR 2311), Rahimullah Jan v. Kashif and

another (PLD 2008 SC 298), 2004 SCMR 249,

Khan v. Sajjad and 2 others (2004 SCMR 215),

Shafique Ahmad v. Muhammad Ramzan and

another (1995 SCMR 855), The State v. Abdul

Ghaffar (1996 SCMR 678) and Mst. Saira Bibi v.

Muhammad Asif and others (2009 SCMR 946).”

In this respect reliance can also be placed on the case

“The State and others Vs. Abdul Khaliq and others”

(PLD 2011 SC 554).

(D.B)Justice Qalandar Ali Khan and Justice Shakeel Ahmad
13

23. Perusal of the record reflects that on the

same set of evidence co-accused namely:-Arifullah,

Hamedullah and Malik Jan were acquitted by the

learned Additional Sessions Judge-I, Bannu vide

judgment dated 14.7.2010 and no appeal was filed

against their acquittal order, it has achieved finality.

24, The learned counsel for the appellant was

asked time and again to distinguish the role of the

accused Shah Alam from the role attributed to the

acquitted co-accused, but he remained answerless.

25. Role of utilization of .30 bore pistol was

given to the respondent as is reflected from FIR

Ex.PW-3/1 and recovery of pistol bearing No.

29025413 of the same bore and discharged empty

of .30 bore from the venue of crime, but the

prosecution failed to prove that the pistol in question

belonged to the respondent, even a single word has not

been uttered by the PWs showing that the said pistol

(D.B)Justice Qalandar Ali Khan and Justice Shakeel Ahmad
14

was left by the respondent on the venue of crime. Gul

Wali Khan/complainant PW-8 alleged that he

sustained injuries during the incident, but does not

know that how and by what means he sustained the

same. Perusal of medicolegal report Ex.PW-3/1 and

injury sheet Ex.PW-3/2 reveals that he had sustained

one lacerated wound 1 %" x %" on the occiput and the

kind of weapon as stated by the Doctor is blunt.

26. Regardless to above, admittedly, Gul Wali

complainant PW-8 not received any bullet injury.

Scanning of the statement of complainant and alleged

eye-witness Dr.Shah Baraz/PW-7 reflects that they in

their examination-in-chief stated that, all the assailants

started firing at us with their respective Fire-arms, at

the moment we all were going out from the clinic

during the firing their deceased brother Kazim Khan

was hit. When analytical thought on such deposition is

put, at the eventful occasion, allegedly five assailants

(D.B)Justice Qalandar Ali Khan and Justice Shakeel Ahmad
15

launched sudden attack on the complainant party with

their deadly weapons in the small dimension of room

of clinic, but none hit from complainant side, inside the

room seems to be illogical rather based on unaccepted

general principle of prudence, because such immediate

attack by using automatic Fire-arms, in such

continuation, admittedly, the injury sustained by Gul

Wali/PW-8 is not of bullet but unknown reasons for

such injury was advanced by the prosecution. The

relevlant portion of statement of PW-7 is reproduced

below:-

"All the accused started firing at us with

their respective Fire-arms."

27. The afore-said deposition in examination-

in-chief is also reiterated by complainant Gul Wali

Khan/PW-8. This complainant cross-examination

peculiarly termed that except Shah Alam/respondent

no other accused had entered in the clinic and he had

(D.B)Justice Qalandar Ali Khan and Justice Shakeel Ahmad
16

made firing inside the clinic. Accused Shah Alam

made single fire at PW-7/Shah Baraz, no other firing

was made inside the clinic. Accused Shah Alam had

made no firing at him or deceased Kazim Khan. This

deposition in cross-examination of Gul Wali Khan

complainant PW-8 who is the star witness of the

prosecution is nugatory to the statements of the other

alleged eye-witnesses namely-Shah Baraz/PW-7,

which falls within the definition of improvement as he

attempted to connect the respondent with the alleged

recovery of pistol, however, such expression of the

complainant/PW-8 release the respondent/accused

from the charge of murder of deceased Kazim Khan or

attempt to commit murder of alleged eye-witness.

Last but not least, the site-plan Ex.PW-6/1 is also not

corresponding to the direction given thereof by

comparison the situation furnished by the alleged eye-

witness/PW-7 Shah Baraz and because of this reason

(D.B)Justice Qalandar Ali Khan and Justice Shakeel Ahmad
17

the probatory value of the site-plan Ex.PW-6/1 too

were frustrated by not corroborating the prosecution’s

stance.

28. Coming to absondence of the respondent /

accused, perusal of the card of arrest reveals that the

accused Shah Alam was arrested on 28.11.2010 i.e.

after four years and one month of the occurrence It is

now settled law that abscondence per se does not

constitute guilt of the accused. Normally the accused

abscond out of fear to be killed in retaliation. Reliance

is placed on Rahimullah Jan V. Kashif PLD 2008

Supreme Court 298, wherein it was held as under:-

“Abscontion of accused

...evidentiary value...Mere abscondance

would not be taken as conclusive proof of

guilt of accused and same being a

suspicious circumstances against him

could not take the place of proof.”

(D.B)Justice Qalandar Ali Khan and Justice Shakeel Ahmad
18

29. For what has been discussed above, we found

no illegality or legal infirmity in the impugned judgment,

the learned trial court rightly acquitted the accused by

extending benefit of doubt, after properly appraising the

evidence on record, calling for no interference by this court,

therefore, the same is upheld and the appeal in hand being

bereft of merit is dismissed.

Announced:
05.12.2017 JUDGE

*Imranullah*

JUDGE

(D.B)Justice Qalandar Ali Khan and Justice Shakeel Ahmad
