Judgment Sheet

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
PESHAWAR.

JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT
Cr.A No. 561-P of 2015.
With
Murder Reference No.13-P/2015
JUDGMENT

Date of hearing............... 06.09.2017... 0c cece cece eee ee eee eeeeaenes
Appellant(s)...(Naseer Ahmed alias Nazir Ahmed) by Syed Abdul

Fayaz and Mr. Bashir Ahmed Khan Advocates.
Respondent(s)/State by Mian Arshad Jan, AAG along with

Mst.Hameeda Bibi (mother of the deceased Yasir)

Wis

QALANDAR ALI KHAN, J:- Having been

convicted under Sections 302/34 PPC read with
7 (A) ATA, 1997 and sentenced to death, and
also convicted under Sections 324/34 PPC read
with Section 7 (b) ATA and sentenced to ten

years R.I and fine of Rs. 100000/- and in default
to further one month S.J, and further convicted
under Section 353/34 PPC read with Section 7
(h) of ATA, 1997 and sentenced to three years
R.I and a fine of Rs.100000/- and in default to
further one month S.I, and also convicted under
Section 15 AA read with Section 7 ATA 1997 to
three years R.I and fine of Rs.100000/- and in
default to further one month S.I, the appellant,
Nasir Ahmed alias Nazir Ahmed, preferred this
appeal against the aforementioned convictions
and sentences awarded to him in case FIR
No.788 dated 21.10.2014 under Sections
302/324/353/34 PPC read with 7 ATA and
Section 15 AA, Police Station Pahari Pura,
Peshawar, by the learned Special Judge, Anti
Terrorism Court-I, Peshawar vide the impugned
judgment dated 22.09.2015.

2. The case against the convict-appellant
and other four co-accused was initiated on the
report of complainant/Sajid Khan ASI, Incharge
Police Post Pakha Ghulam, who dispatched a

murasila from the Police Post to P.S Pahari
Pura, wherein, he narrated the occurrence by
reporting that he along with Yasir and Imtiaz
constables was present at Badhu Samar Bagh
road near Shamal Bridge when four persons on
two motorcycles came from Chargu Kalay Side,
and the moment they were signaled to stop,
they opened fire on the police party thereby
causing firearm injuries to constable Yasir.
According to the FIR, the police party also
retaliated and opened fire on the accused,
causing firearm injuries to three out of four
accused, while their fourth companion made
good his escape from the spot on the
motorcycle. The names of three injured accused
arrested on the spot were Naeem alias
Naeemay son of Ghulam Sadique resident of
Chargu Kalay, from whose possession a 30 bore
pistol along with a magazine containing two
loaded live rounds were recovered, Riaz alias
Badabaray son of Niaz Muhammad resident of
Badaber, from whose possession a 30 bore

pistol along with magazine containing one
loaded rounds was recovered; and the convict-
appellant, from whose possession a 30 bore
pistol along with magazine containing two
loaded live rounds of 30 bore were recovered.
A Motorcycle belonging to accused Riaz alias
Badabaray was taken into possession by the
police in damaged condition. The name of the
fleeing accused was ascertained as Maamoor
Shah alias Mamooray son of Aslam Shah
resident of Samar Bagh. The complainant also
came to know that the accused named in the
FIR were proclaimed offenders in case
registered in P.S Faqir Abad vide FIR No.580
dated 21.07.2014 under Sections 387/506 PPC
read with Section 7 ATA. On the receipt of
murasila in the Police Station, the case was
registered vide FIR No.788 dated 21.010.2014
in P.S Pahari Pura, Peshawar, under Sections
302/324/353/34 PPC read with Section 7 ATA
and Section 15 AA.

3. The record would show that accused

Riaz and Naeem lateron succumbed to the
injuries sustained by them during the
encounter, while absconding accused Maamoor
alias Mamooray was also killed in a police
encounter, leaving the appellant as the lone
surviving accused to face trial under the above
said charges.

4. The postmortem examination of
deceased constable and medical examination of
the injured appellant were conducted, and site
plan was prepared, after spot inspection, by the
1.0, during which, 15 empty shells of 30 bore
were recovered from the places assigned in the
site plan to the accused and 35 empty shells of
7.62 bore were recovered from the places
assigned in the site plan to the police party. The
P.M report showed six firearm injuries on the
body of the deceased constable Yasir, but of the
same size and dimension of 1 x 1 cm. The
medical report of the appellant also showed
couple of firearm injuries on his body. In the
site plan prepared by the I.0; after spot

inspection, deceased accused Naeem was
assigned point No.6 and he was shown to have
fired at deceased constable Yasir and caused
him firearm injury. The site plan does not show
any recovery of empty shells from the place
assigned to the appellant, except blood stained
earth recovered from that place. After recording
statements of the PWs, collection of evidence,
and completion of investigation, challan was
submitted to the trial Court, where formal
charge was framed against the appellant under
the aforementioned sections of law, to which he

pleaded not guilty and claimed trial.

5. During trial, the prosecution produced
and relied upon the statements of as many as 15
PWs including Dr. Akram Alam, Medical Officer
(PW.2); who examined the injured appellant;
Sajid ASI (PW.6), complainant; Dr. Salim Ullah
(PW.10), who conducted autopsy of the dead
body of deceased constable Yasir SPO No.250;
constable (retired) Arsalan (PW.11), marginal

witness to the recovery memos; and, last but
not the least, Murad Khan _Inspector/I.0
(PW.15).

6. After prosecution closed its evidence,
the appellant was examined under Section 342
Cr.PC. He refuted charges leveled against him by
the prosecution, but declined to be examined on
oath within the meaning of Section 340 (2)
Cr.PC or produce defence. After hearing
arguments of learned prosecutor for the State
and learned defence counsel, the learned Judge,
Anti Terrorism Court-I, Peshawar, rendered the
impugned judgment dated 22.09.2015,
whereby, he convicted and sentenced the
appellant to the penalties as mentioned
hereinabove; hence appeal by the convict-
appellant, and murder reference by the learned
trial Court.

7. Arguments of learned counsel for the
convict-appellant and learned AAG, also on
behalf of mother of deceased constable, heard;

and record perused.
8. There can possibly be no two opinions
that for awarding death penalty to an accused, a
learned trial Court must examine and
appreciate the evidence with great care and
cautious, especially when the victim is a police
officer and evidence of the prosecution also
comprise testimony of the police officers, with
no corroboration from an independent source.

9. In this case, the complainant/ASI is the
sole eye witness who was produced by the
prosecution in support of its case, and constable
Imtiaz, who was allegedly the other surviving
eye witness after death of the other member of
the police party namely Yasir, accompanying
the complainant/ASI at the time of occurrence,
was abandoned by the prosecution. It is
noteworthy that the complainant/ASI did not
receive even a scratch in the encounter ensuing
after alleged indiscriminate firing by four
persons ridding on two motorcycles. It is,
indeed, something beyond comprehension that

only one member of the police party ie.
constable Yasir received multiple firearm
injuries, causing his death; but the
complainant/ASI and other member of the
police party namely, Imtiaz escaped unhurt and
did not receive a single scratch despite the fact
that they were in the close proximity of both the
deceased and accused i.e. from minimum 1 to
maximum 9 paces. Besides, the FIR shows that
four persons ridding two motorcycles and
coming from Chargu Kalay side opened fire on
the police party the moment they were signaled
to stop, without any indication in the FIR that
they first got down from the motorcycles and
then started firing at the police party. In the site
plan the I.0 omitted to show this fact, in support
of the FIR, but in his statement before the Court
the I.0, Murad Khan Inspector (PW15) admitted
this fact that presence of all the accused had
been shown on the plain ground and not on the
motorcycles; which, obviously, is contrary to

the version given in the FIR, showing firing on
the police party by the accused straight from
their motorcycles.

10. It is case of the prosecution that the
accused were armed with pistols while the
police personnel were equipped with
Kalashnikov i.e. 7.62 bore rifles; but nothing has
been brought on the record shwoing issuance of
the official rifles of 7.62 bore to members of the
police party, neither such rifles were taken into
possession by the I.0 nor even 35 empty shells
of 7.62 bore, recovered by the I.0 from the
places assigned in the site plan to the police
party, were sent to the firearm expert for
opinion whether the same were fired from one
or more weapons. It is, indeed, noteworthy that
deceased constable Yasir was also in possession
of a 30 bore pistol, but that pistol has not been
accounted for, as only three 30 bore pistols
were allegedly recovered from the three injured
accused including the appellant. The failure on
the part of the I.0 to bring on record proof of

the fact that the recovered pistols belonged to
the appellant and other deceased accused,
would certainly cast doubt on the case of
prosecution against the appellant.

11. The FIR shows simultaneous firing by all
the four accused named in the FIR, but the
complainant/ASI improved his statement
before the Court by saying that deceased
constable Yasir was hit with the firing of the
appellant. Moreover, in the murasila, the
complainant/ASI mentioned the accused named
in the FIR, including the appellant, as
proclaimed offenders in a criminal case of
Police Station, Faqir Abad, vide FIR No.580
dated 21.07.2014 under Sections 387/506 PPC
read with Section7 ATA; but the
complainant/ASI and also the I.0 had to admit
this fact that the appellant was not nominated
either in the aforementioned case of Police
Station Faqir Abad or in any other case of Police
Station Pahari Pura. This belies the assertion of
the prosecution that the accused including the

appellant, were proclaimed offenders, rather
makes the entire version of opening
unprovoked indiscriminate firing by the
accused doubtful.

12. The medical/PM reports of the deceased
and the appellant, then injured, showing no
charring/tattooing marks on the persons of
either of the two inspite of the fact that they had
been shown at a close distance of two paces
from each other also created noticeable dent in
the case of prosecution. The testimony of
Medical Officer (PW.2) further compounded the
mystery by admitting in his statement that he
had not given dimension of fire arm injuries on
the body of the appellant, neither he could say
whether the appellant sustained injuries from
the front or back side. He, nevertheless, stated
that entry wound No.2 was on the back side of
the body of the appellant, though he had not
specified about the other fire arm injuries.

13. The complainant/ASI claimed to have
taken shelter behind a wall near the place of

occurrence at the time of occurrence, but no
such wall has been shown in the site plan.
Moreover, the I.0 admitted this fact that there is
an unexplained delay of 9 days in sending the
recovered pistols and empties to FSL for
opinion, thus marring the chances of report of
FSL with regard to the pistols and empties
recovered from the spot becoming credible
piece of evidence against the appellant.

14. Having scanned through the record and
evidence made available by the prosecution, we
found nothing on record which could lead the
learned trial Court to convict the appellant and
award him death penalty. Therefore, the appeal
is accepted, the conviction and sentences
awarded to the appellant are set aside, and he is
acquitted of the charges while extending him
the benefit of doubt. Consequently, the
appellant be set at liberty, if not required in any
other case.

15. Murder Reference NO.13-P/2015 sent
by the learned trial Court for confirmation of
the sentence is answered in the negative.

Announced.
06.09.2017.
(Ayub) JUDGE

JUDGE
