JUDGMENT SHEET

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
BANNU BENCH.

(Judicial Department)

Cr.A No.120-B of 2015 with
Murder Reference No.09-B of 2015.

Karim Khan
Vs

The State & Afsar Khan etc

JUDGMENT

Date of hearing 13.02.2017

Appellant-Petitioner: Karim Khan by Muhammad
Rasheed Khan DIrma Khel,
Advocate.

Respondent: State by Qudrat Ullah Khan

Gandapur, Assistant Advocate
General.

ISHTIAQ IBRAHIM, J.--- Through this appeal, Karim

Khan, appellant has questioned the judgment of learned

Additional Sessions Judge-I, Bannu, dated 07.10.2015,

whereby he was convicted under section 302(b) P.P.C and

sentenced to death with compensation of Rs.5,00,000/-

(Five lac) under section 544-A Cr.PC payable to the legal

heirs of the deceased and in default whereof to undergo six

months S.I.
-2-

2. The prosecution case as per F.I.R is that on

09.08.2010 at 13.00 hours, Janan Khan, complainant in

company of the deadbody of his son Aziz Khan, lodged a

report in Police Station that, on the day of occurrence, he

alongwith his deceased son left for village Nar Abdul

Karim, in order to bring Rice seed. His son was ahead of

him. When they reached at the Kacha road, near the house

of one Allah Noor at about 08.00 hours accused/ convict

came near them on motorcycle and after crossed him, he

stopped the motorcycle and started firing with his

Kalashnikov at his son Aziz Khan, as a result of which he

was hit and fell on the ground. Accused decamped from the

spot. He could do nothing being empty handed. When he

attended his son he expired. Hence, the instant F.IR.

On completion of investigating, the challan

was put in Court under section 512 Cr.PC, as by then

accused was absconding. The prosecution recorded the

statement of complainant and other PWs in support of their

case. On completion of proceedings under section 512

Cr.PC, the accused/convict was declared as proclaimed
-3-

offender, vide order dated 08.01.2010 by learned Additional

Sessions Judge-IV, Bannu. Accused /convict was arrested

on 04.03.2014 and after completion of investigation,

supplementary challan was submitted before the learned

trial Court, where after completion of codal formalities, the

learned trial court charge-sheeted accused/ convict to which

he pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. Prosecution

evidence was recorded, as by then the complainant had

died, his statement recorded earlier under section 512 Cr.PC

against the accused was transposed on the request of

prosecution as PW-5. On closure of prosecution evidence,

statement of accused was recorded under section 342 Cr.PC

and on conclusion of trial, accused/appellant was convicted

and sentenced as mentioned above.

3. We have heard the learned counsel for the

appellant and learned Asstt: A.G for the state. Record

perused with their valuable assistance.

4. At the very outset learned counsel for

appellant pointed out that impugned judgment is in

violation of section 367 Cr.PC, as learned trial Court has
-4-

not evaluated the statement of complainant in his judgment,

nor it was put to the accused/appellant during recording his

statement recorded under section 342 Cr.PC, therefore, the

impugned judgment is not sustainable.

5. When learned Asstt: A.G for the State was

confronted with the proposition that judgment of learned

trial Court is not in accordance with the provision of section

367 Cr.PC, he tacitly conceded that the impugned judgment

is not of that standard, as required under section 367 Cr.PC,

however, he argued that solitary eye-witness, the

complainant Janan Khan, whose statement was recorded

during earlier trial under section 512 Cr.PC had died, due to

which after arrest of accused/ convict, when trial

commenced, that statement was transposed to the present

case file vide order dated 04.02.2015, which is in

accordance with section 47 of the Qanun-e-Shahadat,

hence, no illegality was committed. He further contended

that it is not an illegality rather irregularity, which can be

cured under section 537 Cr.PC, therefore, the learned trial
-5-

court has rightly relied upon the statement of complainant

PW-5 and convicted the accused.

6. Before thrashing the evidence and giving

findings on merits of the case, it would be in the interest of

justice to see whether the judgment delivered by the learned

trial Court falls within the parameters of section 367 Cr.PC

or otherwise. For convenience and to clarify the position,

we would like to reproduce section 367 Cr.P.C. herein

below:-

6

*S.367. Language of judgment: Contents
of judgment: (1) Every such judgment

shall, except as otherwise expressly
provided by this Code, be written by the
presiding officer of the Court or from the
dictation of such presiding officer in the
language of the Court, or in English, and
Shall_contain_the_point_or_points for
determination, the decision thereon and the
reasons for the decision and shall be date
and signed by the presiding officer in open
Court at the time of pronouncing it and were
it is not written by the Presiding Officer
with his own hand, every page of such
judgment shall be signed by him.

(2) It shall specify the offence (if any) of
which, and the section of the Pakistan Penal

Code or other law under which the accused
-6-

is convicted and the punishment to which he

is sentence”. (emphasis provided)

7. It is basic requirement of section 367 Cr.PC
that the judgment of the Court shall contain the points for

determination, the decision thereon and the reasons for the

decision. In case titled “Sahib Khan _and_four

others...Vs..The State and others” (1997 SCMR_ 871) it

was observed that:

“For reasons to be recorded later, we set
aside the impugned judgment in both these
appeals for the reason that the impugned
judgment does not contain valuation of
evidence and discussion in the manner it
Should be and also does not assign reasons
for arriving at the conclusion as required

under section 367 Cr.PC”.

6 .

Wisdom is also derived from a case titled “Ashig

Hussain and others..Vs..The State and two others” (2003

SCMR 698).

8. The use of word “shall” in section 367 Cr.PC
is indicative of the fact that compliance with the provisions

of the ibid section is mandatory, non-compliance whereof,
-7-
rendered the impugned judgment as inherently defective
and illegal.

In a case titled “Khalid Mehmood..Vs...The
State” _(2004__P.Cr.L.J. _984(FSQ), the following
observations have been made by their Lordships:-

“As to the second limb of argument in the
contention that the learned trial Judge has
also failed to formulate the points for
determination, it may be pointed out here
that use of the word “shall” in provision of
section 367 Cr.P.C, in accordance with the

terms, is mandatory”.
9. It is evident from the record that while
recording of statement of accused/ appellant under section
342 Cr.PC no specific question was put with respect to the
transposition of statement of complainant recorded during
earlier trial under section 512 Cr.PC. Likewise plan reading
of impugned judgment is reflective of the fact that learned
trial court has altogether overlooked the statement of
complainant and has given no findings on it and by doing
this has made complete departure from the provision of

section 367 Cr.PC. In this case complainant Janan Khan,
-8-
father of the deceases, was sole eye witness, whose
statement was recorded under section 512 Cr.PC on
08.01.2010 and after arrest of accused/ convict, the said
statement was transposed in the present case, as at that time
he was dead. The learned trial court has accepted the
testimony of complainant PW-5 purely on academic ground
and factually the evidence of this witness has not been
properly apprised and discussed with other circumstances
of the case, therefore, the impugned judgment is nothing in
the eyes of law. It was the legal obligation of the learned
trial Court to have discussed each and every point, involved
in the case, with reference to evidence produced by
prosecution including the statement of complainant, but it is
not the case here, which is an illegality, cannot be cured
under section 537 Cr.PC, as it has substantial bearing on the

merits of the case, hence, cannot be countenanced by any

means. In case titled “Farrukh _Sayyar_and_ 2 others

Vs.Chairman NAB Islamabad and others” (2004 SCMR

1), it was observed that:
-9-

“It is mandatory requirement of section
367 Cr.PC that a Court while writing a
judgment shall refer to the point or points
of determination, record decision thereon
and also give reasons for the decision. The
Court shall also specify the offence of
which, and the section of the Pakistan
Penal Code or other law under which, the
accused is convicted and the punishment to
which he is sentenced. In the present case
the learned trial Court overlooked the
mandatory provisions of section 367 Cr.PC
and rendered a judgment which falls short
of the requisite standard. Failure to specify
the points for determination as required
under section 367 Cr.PC is an omission
which is not curable under section 537,
Cr.PC and absence of decision on the pints
for determination and reasons in the
judgment amounts to an illegality which

prejudices the case of the accused.

10. Thus for what has been discussed above,

without dilating upon the merits of the evidence, lest it may

prejudice the case of either side, we hold that the impugned

judgment is violative of the statutory provisions of section

367 Cr.PC, therefore, is not sustainable. This appeal is

allowed, the impugned judgment of the learned trial court is

set-aside and the case is remanded back for re-examination
-10-

of accused/ appellant under section 342 Cr.PC, by putting

him question regarding transposition of statement of

complainant Janan Khan recorded during earlier trial under

section 512 Cr.PC, apart from other questions and after re-

hearing learned counsel for the parties, decision afresh by

strictly adhering to section 367 of the Code of Civil

Procedure, within shortest possible time. Accused/

appellant be treated as under trial prisoner. Murder

reference is answered in negative. Parties are directed to

appear before the learned trial court on 28.02.2017.Office is

directed to remit the record to the trial court at the earliest.

Announced.

13.02.2017

*Azam/P.S*

JUDGE

JUDGE
