JUDGMENT SHEET
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
MINGORA BENCH (DAR-UL-QAZA), SWAT
(Judicial Department)

Cr.A No. 76-M/2013

JUDGMENT
Date of hearing: 19.1.2016

Appellant: (Bakht Shad) by
Mr. Sher Muhammad Khan, Advocate

Respondents: (State) by Mr. Rafiq Ahmad, Assistant
Advocate General.
(Riasat Khan) by
Mr. Naeemuddin, Advocate.

HAIDER ALI KHAN, J.- Through this criminal

appeal under section 410, Cr.P.C Bakht Shad, the

appellant herein, has challenged the judgment dated

19.3.2013 of the learned Sessions Judge/Zilla Qazi,

Buner at Daggar, delivered in case FIR No. 687

dated 29.12.2011 under sections 302/34 PPC

registered at Police Station Nawagai, District Buner,

whereby the appellant was convicted under section

302 (b) PPC and sentenced to life imprisonment as

Tazir with payment of  Rs.5,00,000/- as

compensation to the legal heirs of the deceased and

Tajamal 25" ICr.A No. 76-M of 2013 Bakht Shad Vs. The State and another}
he was ordered to remain in jail untill payment of

the compensation.

2. Precise and relevant facts of the case as

per FIR are that on 29.12.2011 at 11:45 hours the

complainant Riasat Khan reported to the local police

at Emergency Ward of Nawagai Hospital to the

effect that he was present in his village Koria when

he got information regarding the murder of his father

Afzal Khan. On inquiry it transpired that his father

deceased Afzal Khan, accompanied by Nasar Khan

and Nadar Khan, had visited one Said Nabi resident

of Jangai, who had returned after performance of

Hajj; on return from the house of the said Haji when

his father alongwith his companions reached bazaar

Jangi he was fired at by the accused Bakht Shad and

his brother Zar Shad who were already present on

the spot duly armed. As a result of firing caused by

the two accused, Afzal Khan, father of the

complainant sustained injuries and died on the spot.

Tajamal 25" ICr.A No. 76-M of 2013 Bakht Shad Vs. The State and another}
Motive behind the occurrence was so stated that

10/12 years back the deceased Afzal Khan had

caused firearm injury to father of the accused

namely Amin Gul and although the matter had been

patched up through compromise but the accused

were still annoyed. The complainant mentioned the

names of Nasar Khan and Nadar Khan to be the eye

witnesses of the occurrence.

3. Report of the complainant was recorded

by Inspector Bakht Zamin Khan (PW-8) in shape of

Murasila Ex.PA/1 which was later on incorporated

into FIR, Ex.PA at 12:45 hours on the same day.

Accused Bakht Shad (the appellant herein) was

arrested whereas his co-accused Zar Shad remained

at large, therefore, after completion of investigation

challan was submitted in the Court for trial of the

accused Bakht Shad and carrying out proceedings

under Section 512, Cr.P.C against the absconding

accused who was later on declared as proclaimed

Tajamal 25" ICr.A No. 76-M of 2013 Bakht Shad Vs. The State and another}
offender by the trial Court after completion of the

said proceedings. The accused Bakht Shad was

formally indicted by the trial Court for the offence to

which he pleaded not guilty and opted to face the

trial. After framing of charge, the prosecution

produced nine witnesses in all in support of its case,

whereafter, statement of the accused under section

342, Cr.P.C was recorded wherein he opted to be

examined on oath and produced evidence in his

defence. Consequently, the accused Bakht Shad

recorded his statement on oath as DW-1 and

produced Zahoor-ud-Din, Hazrat Aman and Ashtar

Khan as DW-2 to DW-4, respectively. At the

conclusion of the trial, the learned trial Court found

the accused Bakht Shad guilty of the charge and

sentenced him as mentioned in Para No.1 above vide

judgment dated 19.3.2013. Being aggrieved, the

appellant has challenged his conviction before this

Court through the appeal in hand.

Tajamal 25" ICr.A No. 76-M of 2013 Bakht Shad Vs. The State and another}
4, Learned counsel for the

appellant/convict contended that the impugned

judgment of the trial Court is against facts and

material on the record; that the prosecution has

badly failed to prove the guilt of the appellant

beyond reasonable doubt and the impugned

judgment is the result of non-appreciation, mis-

appreciation and misjudgment of evidence; that the

occurrence has taken place in main bazaar but no

independent, disinterested and impartial witness has

come forward to support the charge against the

appellant/convict; that the complainant has not

disclosed the source of information regarding the

occurrence but astonishingly he immediately

charged the appellant/convict for the murder of his

father; that the appellant/convict was present at

Police Station Nawagai at the time of the occurrence

and in support of his contention he produced cogent

evidence in his defence but the learned trial Court,

Tajamal 25" ICr.A No. 76-M of 2013 Bakht Shad Vs. The State and another}
without any reason, did not consider the same

evidence and recorded his conviction which is not

legally sustainable. He further argued that FSL

report regarding the crime weapon allegedly

recovered and the crime empties collected from the

spot is in negative which fact negates the story of the

complainant. Learned counsel for the appellant/

convict submitted that case of the prosecution can

from no angle be considered as proved beyond

reasonable doubt, therefore, the impugned judgment

of the learned trial Court is liable to be set aside and

the appellant/convict be acquitted of the charge

levelled against him. The learned counsel placed

reliance on the judgments reported as PLJ_ 1982

Supreme Court 592, PLD 1982 Supreme Court

429, 1990 P.Cr.L.J_ 1607, 2010 SCMR 846, PLJ

2012 Cr.C (Lahore) 875, PLJ 2012 Cr.C (Lahore)

860, 2008 SCMR 158, 2009 SCMR 230, PLJ 2008

SC 269 and 2006 YLR 1317.

Tajamal 25" ICr.A No. 76-M of 2013 Bakht Shad Vs. The State and another}
5. On the other hand, learned counsel for

the complainant and the learned A.A.G, appearing

on behalf of the State, vehemently defended the

impugned judgment of the learned trial Court and

argued that the prosecution has proved its case

against the appellant/convict through confidence

inspiring evidence. They further contended that

there is a strong motive behind the occurrence which

has duly been established by the prosecution

besides, the eye witness of the occurrence is natural

and he has put forth a true and straight forward

account regarding the occurrence which has been

considered by the learned trial Court after

application of its judicious mind. They further

argued that the evidence produced by the

appellant/convict in his defence is not trustworthy

and his involvement in the present case cannot be

exonerated on the basis of the defence evidence

which is neither convincing nor confidence

Tajamal 25" ICr.A No. 76-M of 2013 Bakht Shad Vs. The State and another}
inspiring. Lastly, it was submitted that the judgment

of the trial Court, being well reasoned and well

founded, needs no interference by this Court.

Reliance was placed on 2010 SCMR 1791, PLD

2005 SC _ 288, 2000 SCMR_ 1758, 2008 SCMR

1623, 2009 SCMR 99, 2005 SCMR_ 1958, 2004

SCMR_477, 2004 Supreme Court 663, 2003

SCMR 668, 2011 SCMR 1354 and 2000 SCMR

1805.

6. We have heard the valuable arguments

of the learned counsel for the parties as well as of

the learned A.A.G and have gone through the record

in light of their esteemed assistance.

7. It transpires from perusal of the FIR that

the occurrence took place on 29.12.2011 at 11:00

hours which was reported by the complainant to the

local police at 11:45 hours and the FIR was chalked

on 12:45 hours. Above are the basic information

which have duly been entered in the Murasila and

Tajamal 25" ICr.A No. 76-M of 2013 Bakht Shad Vs. The State and another}
the FIR but according to the statement of Dr. Sher
Zaman (PW-2) he examined the deceased at 11:30
hours and mentioned the time between the death of
the deceased and postmortem report within about
3:00 hours. Similarly, the witness PW-4 who is the
marginal witness of recovery memo Ex.PW-4/1, has
stated that the I.O collected the blood stained earth
from the spot which was taken therefrom at about
1:30 p.m. Regarding report by the complainant, the
witness PW-4 stated in his cross-examination that:-

cet Sal ap dae ES Osh Bit gids 258"
cols AB GU Stine Uuil'ys ol va Use Ji 50
BI A mathe gets 53 Uns 23! =
S Calg Ged ES re hy Ure Brga ye

MSO) 51)

Although, the witness has tried to
correct his steps by stating afterwards that the report
had been lodged prior to the process of recovery
memo, however, the sequence of stating the events
by the witness shows that the witness in his rhythm
uttered the actual fact but later on realised his

mistake and as such wilfully tried to conceal the

Tajamal 25" ICr.A No. 76-M of 2013 Bakht Shad Vs. The State and another}
-10-

facts. Another amazing aspect of the case is that the

complainant Riasat Khan, who is son of the

deceased, while lodging the report did not disclose

name of the eye witness Nasar Khan (PW-7) who

first narrated the story to him about the murder of

his father. According to the narrative of the

complainant contained in the FIR, PW-7 was

accompanying the deceased and after the occurrence

he went to inform his son i.e the complainant who

was present at his village. It is also pertinent to

mention that PW-7 is a chance witness because he is

not the resident of the same village where the

occurrence took place. If statements of the two

witnesses i.e the complainant and PW-7, are placed

in juxtaposition with the statement of the Medical

Officer (PW-2) it becomes crystal clear that the

occurrence had taken place much earlier than alleged

by the prosecution because if the occurrence took

place at 11:00 am and PW-7 went to inform the

Tajamal 25" ICr.A No. 76-M of 2013 Bakht Shad Vs. The State and another}
-l1l-

complainant (PW-6) in his village Koria situated at a
distance of 15/20 minutes on foot and back to the
place of occurrence in the same span of 15/20
minutes, then lodging of the report at 11:45 a.m is
not possible. It would be appropriate to reproduce
here the relevant portion of cross-examination of
PW-7.

UE Sal) 23 Une a Ig h ES ne sig"
FA ols eae we rbl Sl ss
SB oH Ci os) oh Op ie aly

mad 2 ab ge gle -ST.O 0: 28 ur -
al. Uh aga ge Cy 1S Ci yo 0 es
a ale LO - US die Us se 2S

" Sigs 3 Cubs 25-20 3 hye

If for a while statement of the PW-7 be
considered as true to the extent of time references
narrated by him even then the investigation of the
case preceded the lodging of the report which is a
material irregularity committed by the I.O in the
investigation. Record shows that the complainant
did not mention the name of PW-7 as informer but
later on stated that he was informed by PW-7 about

the occurrence, thus, the contents of the FIR and

Tajamal 25" ICr.A No. 76-M of 2013 Bakht Shad Vs. The State and another}
-12-

statements of the PWs are not in conformity. The

mentioned improvement in the case, being deliberate

and dishonest, cast serious doubt on the veracity of

the witnesses, hence, their statements cannot be

relied upon. Reliance in this regard is placed on

PLJ 2008 SC 269.

8. Another important aspect of the case is

that the appellant/convict has raised the plea of alibi

in his defence and produced three witnesses in

support of his this contention. The appellant/convict

and his witnesses have stated in explicit terms that

the appellant/convict was present in Police Station

Nawagai when the S.H.O got information of the

occurrence at 11:00 a.m and he left for Jangai; and

thereafter the appellant and his companions also

came out of the police station. The presence of the

appellant and his other companions has been

confirmed by Inspector Bakht Zamin Khan in his

statement recorded as PW-8. If the plea of alibi

Tajamal 25" ICr.A No. 76-M of 2013 Bakht Shad Vs. The State and another}
-13-

raised by the appellant/convict is considered in the

light of statements of PW-2, PW-6 and PW-7, which

have been discussed earlier in detail, it becomes

clear that there is much weight in the said plea for

the reasons firstly; that presence of the

appellant/convict in the Police Station on the day of

occurrence is an admitted fact confirmed by PW-8

and secondly; the contention of the appellant/convict

that he was present in the police station at the

relevant time i.e 11:00 gets support from the

statement of the Medical Officer (PW-2) who

examined the dead body at 11:30 a.m and mentioned

the time between the postmortem and death of the

deceased as three hours. Although, PW-8 has stated

in his cross-examination that the appellant had left

the police station 30/45 minutes prior to the

occurrence but if the said statement be considered as

true even then the prosecution version is negated by

the statement of the Medical Officer (PW-2).

Tajamal 25" ICr.A No. 76-M of 2013 Bakht Shad Vs. The State and another}
-14-

Moreso, the appellant/convict has recorded his

statement on oath as DW-1 and produced three

witnesses in his defence who have supported his

contention in clear terms. In a judgment of the

august Supreme Court reported as PLD 1982

Supreme Court 429 even it has been held that the

onus of proving affirmatively his alibi does not lie

on the accused and in the sense onus lies on the

prosecution to prove the guilt of the accused beyond

reasonable doubt. The relevant portion of the

referred judgment is reproduced herein below for

convenience sake:-

“the onus of proving affirmatively
his alibi does not lie upon the
accused, to the extent and in the
sense onus lies on the prosecution to
prove the guilt of the accused
beyond reasonable doubt. Therefore,
the accused, in order to succeed on
his plea of alibi need only to
produce evidence sufficient to raise
in the mind of the Court a
reasonable possibility that he may
be at the place where he asserts he
was, rather than at the place of the
crime at the time of occurrence. In
such a case a reasonable doubt will
have arisen as to his participation in
the commission of the crime, the

Tajamal 25" ICr.A No. 76-M of 2013 Bakht Shad Vs. The State and another}
-15-

benefit of which, must be given to

him”.

The question before this Court in light
of the afore-referred judgment is that whether or not
the plea of the appellant/convict has the force to
plausibly convince the Court to divert towards the
probability regarding his presence somewhere else at
the time of occurrence and thereby a reasonable
doubt is created in a prudent mind. No doubt, the
evidence produced by the appellant/convict in his
defence and the concocted evidence of the
prosecution reasonably tends the Court to entertain a
reasonable doubt regarding presence of the
appellant/convict on the spot of the occurrence at the
relevant time.

9. It is also observed that the prosecution
has not taken the pain to examine the second eye
witness namely Nadar Khan. Even, when the

defence counsel cross-examined the I.O in this

regard, he tried to save his neck by stating that the

Tajamal 25" ICr.A No. 76-M of 2013 Bakht Shad Vs. The State and another}
-16-

witness Nadar Khan was not ready to record his

statement. No doubt, the said Nadar Khan was an

important witness for the prosecution and_ his

evidence would be of much value being eye witness

to the occurrence but he was given up by the

prosecution for no good reason. In such like

situation, the Court can fairly draw a presumption

under illustration (g) of Article 129 of Qanun-e-

Shahdat Order, 1984 that had the second eye-witness

been examined in the Court his evidence would have

been unfavourable to the prosecution. Reliance in

this respect is placed on 2010 SCMR 846.

No doubt, conviction of an accused can

be recorded on the sole testimony of a single eye

witness provided his deposition is corroborated by

other circumstantial evidence collected by the

prosecution. The present case mainly hinges on the

statement of eye witness Nasar Khan (PW-7) who is

closely related to the complainant. Although, the

Tajamal 25" ICr.A No. 76-M of 2013 Bakht Shad Vs. The State and another}
-17-

evidence led by PW-7 cannot be discarded mere on

the ground of close relationship with the

complainant, however, the Court must be cautious

while relying on the evidence of an interested

witness for safe administration of justice. Reliance is

placed on PLJ_ 2012 Cr.C (Lahore) 875. The

relevant portion of the judgment is as under:-

“It is a settled principle of criminal
jurisprudence that evidence of a
witness who is inimical to the
accused and a chance witness, as a
matter of caution and for safe
administration of justice, cannot be
believed unless corroborated by
some independent, unimpeachable
and trustworthy source”.

In the present case, the statement of

PW-7 has not been strongly corroborated by other

trustworthy source, therefore, conviction of the

accused/appellant on the basis of his testimony does

not seem fair and just.

10. Record also shows that the crime

weapon was allegedly recovered on the pointation of

the appellant/convict. According to the statement of

Tajamal 25" ICr.A No. 76-M of 2013 Bakht Shad Vs. The State and another}
-18-

the alleged eye witness (PW-7), the appellant/

convict and his co-accused were armed with

Kalashnikovs but according to recovery memo

Ex.PW-5/1 a gun of the kind Punj-Zarbi was

allegedly recovered from the baitak of the

appellant/convict on his pointation. Interesting

aspect of the case regarding the recovery of crime

weapon is that the I.O had searched the house and

Hujra of the appellant/convict soon after the

occurrence but he recovered nothing at that time and

astonishingly recovered the crime weapon after 15

days of the occurrence from the hujra/baitak of the

appellant/convict. Moreso, the said crime weapon

and the crime empties recovered from the place of

occurrence have been examined through laboratory

but the report furnished by the FSL in this regard is

in negative. Hence, there remains no doubt that the

gun allegedly recovered from the baitak of the

appellant/convict was not the weapon which had

Tajamal 25" ICr.A No. 76-M of 2013 Bakht Shad Vs. The State and another}
-19-

been used in the occurrence. So far recovery of

crime empties from the place of occurrence is

concemed, no doubt the presence of crime empties

and blood stained earth on the spot well establish the

murder of the deceased but the prosecution has

badly failed to connect the appellant/accused with

the occurrence through convincing evidence.

Therefore, it is held that recovery of the crime

weapon has become highly doubtful keeping in view

the facts and circumstances of the case.

11. So far as contention of learned counsel

for the complainant is concerned that there is a

strong motive behind the occurrence, it appears that

the complainant without carrying out any probe

straight away and immediately charged the

appellant/convict and his brother in the present case

because of the previous enmity which was mended.

Contention of the complainant is that 10/12 years

ago the deceased had caused firearm injury to father

Tajamal 25" ICr.A No. 76-M of 2013 Bakht Shad Vs. The State and another}
-20-

of the appellant/convict which rivalry between the

parties had been patched up through a compromise

but the appellant/convict was annoyed because of

this incident and committed the murder of his father.

Record shows that the prosecution has produced no

evidence regarding annoyance of the appellant/

convict despite they had effected compromise with

him. There is nothing on the record to show that the

appellant/convict or his brothers ever threatened the

deceased or his other family members nor there is

any evidence to show that they ever attempted at the

life of the deceased in furtherance of the alleged

motive during the said period of 10/12 years.. The

prosecution has tried to bring on the record previous

FIRs against the appellant/convict and his brothers

and similarly counsel for the complainant has cross-

examined the appellant/convict and other defence

witnesses just to prove that they are hardened

criminals, however, this Court is confined to the

Tajamal 25" ICr.A No. 76-M of 2013 Bakht Shad Vs. The State and another}
-21-

present case only and involvement of the

appellant/convict in other criminal cases cannot be

considered as a corroborative piece of evidence for

his conviction in the present case. Hence, it is held

that the prosecution has failed to establish the

motive against the appellant/convict.

12. The prosecution was duty bound to

prove the guilt of the appellant/convict beyond

reasonable doubt, however, from careful analysis of

the material available on the record, serious doubts

and dents in the prosecution case have come to the

light. It is well settled that while extending the

benefit of doubt to an accused it is not necessary that

there should be many circumstances creating doubt;

a single circumstance creating a reasonable doubt in

a prudent mind is sufficient for an accused to get its

benefit. Guidance in this regard is sought from the

reported judgment of the august Supreme Court

2009 SCMR 230.

Tajamal 25" ICr.A No. 76-M of 2013 Bakht Shad Vs. The State and another}
-22-

As each case has its own peculiar

circumstances, therefore, the case law produced by

learned counsel for the complainant one way or the

other do not conform to the facts and circumstances

of the present case, hence, cannot be considered for

maintaining the conviction of the appellant/convict.

12. In view of what has been discussed

above, the conviction of the appellant/accused

recorded by the learned trial Court is not legally

sustainable. Therefore, we allow this appeal, set

aside the impugned judgment dated 19.3.2013

rendered by the learned Sessions Judge/ Zilla Qazi,

Buner at Daggar, delivered in case FIR No. 687

dated 29.12.2011, under sections 302/34 PPC

registered at Police Station Nawagai, District Buner

and resultantly acquit the appellant Bakht Shad son

of Amin Gul of the charge levelled against him. He

be released forthwith if not required in any other

case.

Tajamal 25" ICr.A No. 76-M of 2013 Bakht Shad Vs. The State and another}
-23-

Above are the reasons for our short
order of the even date announced in the open Court.
Announced.

Dt: 19.1.2016.

JUDGE

JUDGE

Tajamal 25" ICr.A No. 76-M of 2013 Bakht Shad Vs. The State and another}
