Judgment Sheet

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
PESHAWAR.

JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT

Cr.A No. 607-P of 2014.

JUDGMENT

Date of hearing...............18.10.2017........0. eect eee

Appellant: (Imran Dilawar) by Mr.Noor Alam Khan,
Advocate.

Respondents/State: (ANF) by Mr. Muhammad Tariq Kakar,
Advocate.

QALANDAR ALI KHAN, J:-This criminal

appeal by the convict/appellant, Imran
Dilawar, pertains to case FIR No.05 registered
in Police Station, ANF, Peshawar under

Section 9 ( c )14/15 CNSA, 1997, on
11.01.2014, on the report of Inspector,
Mushtaq Ahmed P.S_ ANF, _ Peshawar,
(complainant), who had allegedly, received
information through high ups about smuggling
of narcotics by notorious drug smugglers,
namely, Azgar son of Zamin Khan Shinwari,
and Usman son of Yar Muhammad Shinwari,
residents of Landi-Kotal through the
appellant/accused in  Motorcar No.VV-
155/Islamabad from tribal territory to Punjab;
therefore, he along with other police officials
mentioned in the FIR laid a_ barricade near
Kacha Garhi, Jamrud road, Peshawar, and
stopped the aforementioned car coming from
Karkhano market, and after ‘overpowering’
driver of the motorcar, who disclosed his
name as Imran Dilawar son of Dilawar Masih,
resident of Hayatabad, Peshawar, also
revealed, during interrogation, presence of
narcotics in the secret cavity of dish-board of
the car. According to the
complainant/Inspector, keeping in view the

prevailing security situation, the motorcar
along with the narcotics and_ the
accused/appellant were shifted to P.S ANF,
where search of the car led to recovery of 7
packets containing tikkis of opium and four
packets chars Garda wrapped in yellow
adhesive tape, which on weighment were
found 1 x 1 kilogram each, total 7 kilograms
opium, and four kilograms chars Garda. After
recovery, the complainant separated 10/10
grams samples from each of 7 packets of
opium and 4 packets of chars Garda for
chemical analysis in FSL, and sealed them
separately; while the remaining contraband
were also sealed _ separately. The
complainant/Inspector also recovered cash
amount of _Rs.7000/-, photo copy of
registration of the motorcar in the name of
Noor-ul-Amin son of Muhammad Amin
resident of Harno Thandapani, Islamabad,
receipt of Madina Rent —A-car, press card,
smart card, CNIC of the accused/appellant,
keys, receipt of license, Nokia cell phone set

and Sims as a result of personal search of the
accused/appellant, and also took into
possession the vehicle used in_ the

commission of the offence.

2. The samples separated from the
recovered opium and _ chars. by the
complainant/Inspector were sent to the FSL,
Peshawar, and result there-from was received
in the affirmative, confirming the samples to
be that of opium and chars, respectively. The
remaining two co-accused, named in the FIR
as Azgar and Usman remained at large,
therefore, were proceeded against under
Sections 204 and 87 Cr.PC, and on
completion of investigation, challan was
submitted against them under Section 512
Cr.PC, while complete challan was submitted
against the appellant/accused to the learned
trial Court/Judge, Special Court (CNS),

Peshawar.

3. The learned Trial Court/Judge, Special
Court (CNS), Peshawar, formally charged the

accused/appellant under Section 9 ( c ) read
with Sections 14/15 CNSA, 1997, to which the
accused/appellant pleaded not guilty and
claimed trial. In order to substantiate charges
against the accused/appellant, the
prosecution produced Mehmood-ul-Hassan,
Inspector/SHO P.S ANF Peshawar (PW'1);
Constable Zaheer Ahmed P.S ANF
Peshawar(PW.2); Bashir Khan ASI P.S ANF
Peshawar (PW.3); Mushtaq Ahmed, Inspector
P.S, ANF Sialkot (PW.4) and Mushtaq
Ahmed HC PS ANF Sialkot (PW5). After
prosecution closed its evidence, statement of
the appellant/accused was recorded under
Section 342 Cr.PC, wherein, he refuted
allegation of recovery of narcotics from his
possession levelled against him by the
prosecution; but declined to be examined on
oath or produce defence evidence. Having
heard the learned Special Prosecutor and
learned counsel for the accused, the learned
Judge, Special Court (CNS), Peshawar,
rendered the impugned judgment dated

25.10.2014, thereby convicting the
accused/appellant under Section 9 (c ) CNSA
1997, and awarding him the punishment of
imprisonment for life with fine of Rs.200000/-
and in case of failure to pay the fine to further
one year S.l; while extending benefit of
Section 382-B Cr.PC to the
appellant/accused; hence the instant appeal
by the appellant/accused against his
conviction and sentences awarded to him by
the learned Judge, Special Court (CNS),

Peshawar.

4. Arguments of learned counsel for the
appellant and learned Standing counsel on

behalf of the ANF heard; and record perused.

5. Notwithstanding contentions of learned
counsel for the appellant with regard to the
alleged recovery of 7 kgs opium and 4 kgs
chars Garda, total 11 kilograms narcotics,
from the secret cavity in the dish-board of the
motorcar inside the police station and not at
the place where the motorcar was found,

allegedly, having the narcotics, the undisputed
presence of the appellant/accused in the
motorcar wherefrom the recovery of narcotics
was made, coupled with his statement under
section 342 Cr.P.C to the effect that he was
seated on the rear seat of the motorcar being
servant of Azgar who was driving the car at
the relevant time whereas Usman was
seated on the front seat of the car, and
further that both the accused were let free by
the 1.0 with ulterior motives, whereas he
“being poor servant of Azgar was. substituted
for them’, together with recovery of receipt of
Madina Rent-A-car showing him _ hiring the
car on self driving basis from 08.01.2014 to
22.01.2014, not only proves his presence on
the driving seat of the car, at the relevant time,
but also belie his assertion that he was not
driving the car and was present in the car only

as a servant of the absconding co-accused.

6. The possession of narcotics having
been proved against the appellant/accused,

the next question for determination was
quantum of punishment, as the
appellant/accused was awarded punishment
of imprisonment for life for having in his
possession 11 kilograms of narcotics i.e. 7
kilograms opium and 4 kilograms chars
Garda. The learned counsel for the
appellant/accused, therefore, questioned
taking of samples from entire opium of 7
kilograms, in view of each of the 7 packets of
opium containing 4 tikkis (slabs). In view of
admission on the part of the PWs that
samples were not separated from each tikki
(slab) of the opium and that samples were
taken from the packets containing tikkis
(slabs), the case property was requisitioned
and opened in the Court. On opening the
packets of opium, 4 tikkis (slabs) were found
in each one packet of opium and sample was
also found separated by cutting one corner of
the tikkis (slabs). In view of the fact that seven
samples were, admittedly, not separated from
each of the four tikkis (slabs) in a packet; and,

thus, 10 grams sample separated from the
packet cannot be considered representing the
entire one kg opium in a packet; and, in the
same manner, opinion of the chemical
examiner would also be with respect to only
10 grams opium from a packet, total 70 grams
from seven packets of opium. There was,
however, nothing on the record to suggest
that chars in four packets was also in the
shape of tikkis (slabs), therefore, 10 grams
sample obtained from each of four packets
of chars; and, likewise, report of the chemical
examiner in respect thereof is to be
considered representing four kgs _ chars in
four packets; and, thus, bringing down
quantity of narcotics from 11 kgs to 4 kgs
chars and 70 grams opium, total 4070 grams
narcotics; and accordingly making the
accused/appellant liable to lesser punishment
in the light of judqment of the apex Court
dated 06.05.2015 in Cr.A No.14-P of 2015
titled Muhammad Mustafa Versus the

State.
7. In view of the forgoing discussion, the
appeal is partially accepted and while
maintaining conviction of the
appellant/accused under Section 9 (c) CNSA;
the punishment awarded to the appellant is
reduced from life imprisonment to five years
R.I, with benefit of Section 382-B Cr.P.C; and
also to the reduced fine of Rs.50, 000/- and in
default of payment of fine to further two
months S.l, instead of sentence of fine of
Rs.200000/- awarded to the appellant by the
learned trial Court/ Judge, Special Court
(CNS), Peshawar. The appeal is accordingly

disposed of in the terms noted hereinabove.

Announced.
18.10.2017.

JUDGE

JUDGE

*Ayub*

(D.B) —Hon’ble Mr. Justice Lal Jan Khattak.
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Qalandar Ali Khan.
