Ss

-1-

JUDGMENT SHEET

PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
MINGORA BENCH
(Judicial Department)

Cr.A No, 68-M/2022
Pervaiz Khan son of Saleh Muhammad

(Appellant)
ws
The State & another
(Respondents)
Present: Syed Abdul Haq, ASC, for the
appellant.

Syed Sultanat Khan, Astt:A.G, for the State
along with the respondent/ complainant,
Rehmat Khan, in person.

Dates of hearing: 20.06.2023

JUDGMENT
SHAHID KHAN, J.- Through the subject

criminal appeal, the appellant has challenged
the order/judgment of his conviction & sentence
passed by the learned Additional Sessions
Judge 1*/Izafi Zila Qazi, Dir Upper, dated,
17.02.2022, in respect of case FIR No. 627
dated, 18.12.2018, U/Ss 302/34 PPC, P.S, Dir,

District Dir Upper.

2. Reportedly, the police party
headed by Sub Inspector, Fazal Karim Khan
when reached to the Dir Upper hospital,
pursuant to receipt of information that dead
body of one Muhammad Zafar Khan has been

brought therein. At emergency room of the

Nawab (D.B) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Naeem Anwar
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Shahid Khan
-2-

hospital, the complainant, Rehmat Khan
reported the subject event to the visiting party
of police to the effect that on the fateful day,
date & time, he, with his father, Muhammad
Zafar Khan (the deceased), his brother, Amir
Baz Khan and wife, Mst. Fauzia Bibi, after
attending court proceedings in connection with
case FIR No. 461 dated, 03.08.2018, U/Ss
302/34 PPC, P.S, Dir, were returning to their
home. On their arrival to the spot of occurrence,
his father went to the nearby vegetable shop in
order to collect his Chaddar, whereas, the rest
of the complainant-party were waiting for his
return near the patrol pump. In the meanwhile,
the accused, Pervaiz (the appellant herein) and
his co-accomplices, Mushtaq and Yousaf,
(while being duly armed with pistols) emerged,
the accused, Pervaiz fired at his father, with his
pistol, as a result of it, he got hit on different
parts of his body and died at the spot. In
addition to the aforesaid complainant-party, the
occurrence was claimed to have been witnessed
by many people of the locality present at the

spot. Motive for the occurrence was stated to be

Nawab (D.B) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Naeem Anwar
+ Hon'ble Mr. Justice Shahid Khan
Ny

-3-

previous blood feud enmity between the parties.
In view of the report of the complainant, the
‘Murasila’ (Ex. PW-1/1) was drafted which
culminated into the ibid FIR (Ex. PW-5/1)
registered against the accused/appellant and

other co-accused at P.S concerned.

3. Initially, all the accused were
avoiding their lawful arrest, therefore,
proceedings U/S 512 Cr.P.C were initiated
against them. Upon arrest of the accused/
appellant & other co-accused followed by
completion of the investigation, supplementary
challan was drawn and was sent-up for trial to
the learned trial Court. Accused were
confronted with the statements of allegations
through formal charge to which they pleaded

not guilty and claimed trial.

4. To substantiate the guilt of the
accused/appellant & other co-accused, the
prosecution furnished its account consist of the
statements of thirteen (13) witnesses. The
accused were confronted with the evidence so
furnished through statements of accused within

the meaning of section 342 Cr.P.C.

_ Nawab (D.B) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Naeem Anwar
Hon'ble Mr. Justice Shahid Khan
-4-

5. On conclusion of proceedings in
the trial, in view of the evidence so recorded
and the assistance so rendered by the learned
counsel for the accused/appellant and the
learned counsel for the complainant/learned
Public Prosecutor, the learned trial Court
arrived at the conclusion that the prosecution
has successfully brought home charge against
the appellant/accused, Pervaiz Khan, through
cogent & worth reliable evidence, as such, he

was convicted & sentenced as under;-

U/S 302 (b) PPC to life imprisonment as Ta’zir
with compensation of Rs. 500,000/- U/S 544-A
Cr.P.C, (payable to the legal heirs of the deceased),
which shall be recoverable as arrears of the land
revenues and in default of the payment of the fine/
compensation, the appellant shall further undergo
six months, S.I.

The benefit of section 382-B Cr.P.C was also
extended to the accused/appellant.

Needless to mention here, that the
co-accused, Rehman Yousaf and Mushtaq were
acquitted of the charges levelled against them
by extending them the benefit of the doubt,
through the aforesaid impugned  order/

judgment.

6. It obliged the appellant/accused to
approach this Court through the subject

criminal appeal.

Nawab (D.B) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Naeem Anwar
Hon'ble Mr. Justice Shahid Khan
a0)

-5-

7. Arguments of the learned counsel
for the accused/appellant as well as the
learned Astt: A.G appearing on behalf of the
States have been heard at a substantial length
and the record gone through with their

valuable assistance.

8. Needless to highlight that in this
case the law of the land was set in motion
when the police contingent, headed by the S.I,
Fazal Karim Khan (PW-1) reached the
emergency ward of Dir Upper Hospital,
pursuant to receipt of a clue that the dead
body of the deceased, Muhammad Zafar Khan
has been brought therein, whereby, the
complainant, Rehmat Khan (PW-6), (the son
of the deceased) reported them the subject
occurrence in terms that on the fateful day, he,
with his father, Muhammad Zafar Khan (the
deceased), his brother Amir Baz Khan (PW-7)
and wife, Mst. Fauzia Bibi (the abandoned
PW), after attending the Court proceedings of
case FIR No. 461 dated 03.08.2018, U/Ss

302/34 PPC, P.S, Dir, were on their way to

Nawab (D.B)} Hon'ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Naeem Anwar
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Shahid Khan
-6-

their home. As soon as, they reached the
venue of crime, his father went to the nearby
vegetable shop in order to collect his
Chaddar, in the meanwhile, the
accused/appellant, along with other co-

accused (while being duly equipped with

pistols) emerged and_the appellant/accused
Pervaiz Khan started firing at his father, due
to which he got hit on different parts of his

body and died at the spot.

9, There is no second opinion
about the fact that the effective & specific role
of firing at the deceased has been attributed to
the present accused/appellant, Pervaiz Khan
by the complainant in his initial report in the
shape of ‘Murasila’ followed by the FIR, with
a specific motive which stated to be previous
blood feud enmity between the parties. The
FIR in the subject case has been lodged with
utmost promptitude, as the occurrence has
taken place on 18.12.2018 at 12:00 hours,
whereas, the matter was reported to the local

police on the same day at 12:15 hours ive.

Nawab (D.B) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Naeem Anwar
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Shahid Khan
_7-
within a_span of just 15 minutes. Other than

the above, both the parties were known to
each other due to existence of the previous
motive (in connection with the aforesaid
criminal case), as such, there was no chance
of misidentification or false implication on the

part of the complainant-party.

10. In order to prove their case, the
prosecution has mainly been relying upon the
eyewitness-account offered by the two
prosecution witnesses, whose statements have
been recorded as PW-6 and PW-7,
respectively. The complainant of the subject
case, Rehmat Khan, (who is none else but the
real son of the deceased) offered a natural &
straight-forward account of the occurrence, as
highlighted in the ‘Murasila’ followed by the
FIR. He was cross-examined at a substantial
length, however, he remained consistent on
most of the material particulars of the subject
case. Same was the case with the account of
another PW, Amir Baz Khan who has given a

similar narration of the occurrence in his

Nawab (D.B) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Naeem Anwar
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Shahid Khan
-8-

examination-in-chief while deposing as PW-7.
He had also remained consistent in his
testimony during the course of his cross-
examination. There has been some minor
discrepancies occurring during the course of
cross-examinations of these two PWs but the
same cannot be taken as having a sweeping
effect on their testimonies rather the trend of
their cross-examinations would suggest that
with the blessing of the learned counsel for
the defence, the time of their departure from
the house for the court proceedings, the
factum of collection of the Chaddar from the
vegetable shop and the presence of the rest of
the complainant-party at the spot have been
brought from the mouths of these witnesses.
No doubt, there has been some variation
existing in the evidence vis-a-vis, not
knowing the name of the owner of the
vegetable shop, from whose shop the father of
the complainant was going to collect his
Chaddar coupled with the number of injuries

received by the deceased. The learned counsel

Nawab (D.B) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Naeem Anwar
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Shahid Khan

-9-

appearing on behalf of the appellant laid much
stress on these discrepancies (as highlighted
above) and claimed that the same were
sufficient for disbelieving eyewitness-account
offered in the case in hand, however, it is
important to be noted here that an
eyewitness/complainant may not be expected
to have given an exact time of occurrence
while lodging his first report thereof. The
PWs while appearing in the Court after more
than 02 years of the occurrence might not be
recollecting the exact time of occurrence from
their own memories but they may have been
stood guided by the time of occurrence given
in the FIR used for refreshing their memories
before recording their statements. Substantial
time had lapsed between happening of the
events and its description by the two
witnesses offered during the course of trial of
the appellant. Recollection of events
happening before, at the time and after the
occurrence with a photographic precision and

that also after a lapse of more than 02 years

Nawab (D.B) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Naeem Anwar
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Shahid Khan
-10-

would be unrealistic expectations from these
PWs. In such circumstances, the
contradictions mentioned above may safely be
taken as minor in nature having no bearing on
the material aspects of the subject case, in
respect of which the evidence of these PWs
have mostly remained unshaken, confidence
inspiring & worth reliable. In case titled

“Khadim Hussain v/s The State” reported as

.

PLD 2010 Supreme Court 669, the Apex
Court has held that creeping in of minor
contradictions in the testimony of PWs, with
passage of time, have been natural and the
same could be ignored easily. Relevant part
of the observation of the august Court is

reproduced for ready reference;

We have also adverted to the contention of learned
ASC that various contradictions in the statements
of the prosecution witnesses have not been taken
into consideration causing serious prejudice
against the appellant. It has been held time and
again by this Court that minor contradictions do
creep_in with the passage of time and can _be
ignored safely.

Similarly, in case titled

“Muhammad Ilyas v/s The State” reported as

Nawab (D.B) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Naeem Anwar
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Shahid Khan
-ll-
“2011 SCMR_ 460” the Hon’ble Supreme

Court has also observed as follows;

Contradictions which are not grave in nature
can _be ignored safely as minor contradictions

creep in with passage of time. Merely on the
basis of contradictions, statement of a

prosecution witness cannot be discarded if
corroborated by other incriminating material.
(underline supplied)

Further reliance in this respect
may also be placed on the judgment of Apex
Court rendered in case titled “Zulfigar Ahmad
v/s The State” reported as “2011 SCMR 492”.
11. Apart from the above, the
credibility of the ocular-account cannot be
doubted in the case in hand on the ground that
no question has been put to the eyewitnesses
with respect to any obstacle or hurdle existed
between their visibility range vis-a-vis the
accused-party, in particular, the accused/
appellant, Pervaiz Khan, who have been
assigned a specific role firing at the deceased.
The prosecution has also been able to prove the
place of occurrence, wherefrom, the
Investigating Officer has also collected

substantial materials in the shape of blood

Nawab (D.B) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Naeem Anwar
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Shahid Khan
-12-

stained earth, two empties of 30 bore pistol,
vide different recovery memos. The place of
occurrence has not at all been seriously
disputed by the defence side during the course
of cross-examinations of these PWs. The
prosecution has also been able to sufficiently
explain the presence of the PWs at the spot.
When their presence stood established on the
record, they were found truthful in their
narrations being natural and confidence
- inspiring, then their testimonies may be made
OS SS the basis of conviction even in absence of any
independent corroboration. In this respect,
reliance is placed on the judgment of Hon’ble
Supreme Court of Pakistan rendered in case
titled “Muhammad Waris _v/s_The State”
reported as “2008 SCMR 784” wherein, it has
been held;

“The_explanation offered _by the said _two_eye-
witnesses_regarding their_presence at the place of
occurrence at the relevant time had been accepted by
the two learned Courts and no reason exists which
could _persuade_us_to_hold otherwise. Both these
P.Ws. were thus, natural and independent witnesses
of the occurrence who had been rightly delivered by
the two learned Courts. Corroboration is only rule
of caution and not a rule of law and if the eye-
witness account is found reliable and trustworthy
then there is hardly any need to look for any
corroboration.”

Nawab (D.B) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Naeem Anwar
Hon’ble Mr, Justice Shahid Khan
-13-

12. The medical evidence so furnished
in the subject case is also inconsonance with the
story of the prosecution. The dead body of the
deceased, Muhammad Zafar Khan has been
examined by Dr. Sahib Gul, PW-8. His report Ex.
PW-8/1, speaks loud & clear about the nature of
the firearm injuries received by the deceased and
that too on the vital organs of his body. He was
put to lengthy & searching cross-examination by
the defence but nothing beneficial could be
extracted from his mouth qua the innocence of the
accused/appellant.

13. The other circumstantial evidence
brought on the record by the prosecution do
support their case to a large extent, which
includes the pointation of the place of occurrence
by the accused/appellant, after his arrest, recovery
of blood stained earth and crime empties of 30
bore pistol from the spot as well as blood stained
garments of the deceased coupled with its
positive FSL reports, therefore, in view of the
aforesaid corroboratory evidence too, the

accused/appellant has rightly been found guilty of

Nawab (D.B) Hon‘ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Naeem Anwar
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Shahid Khan

-14-

the commission of offence by the learned trial
Court.
14. The accused/appellant with other
co-accused has also remained absconder for
sufficient length of period. In order to prove the
factum of their absconsion, the prosecution has
not only initiated proceedings against them U/S
512 Cr.P.C but they have also recorded the
statements of as many as 09 witnesses in their
absence. The prosecution has also relied upon
the testimony of Fazal Malik, DFC, whose
is statement was recorded as SW-1. He has stated
<y/ in his statement, that he had obtained warrant
U/S 204 Cr.P.C against the appellant from the
Court of learned Judicial Magistrate concerned
along with a proclamation U/S 87 Cr.P.C. In
respect of execution of warrant U/S 204 Cr.P.C
he visited the village of the appellant and in
presence of the witnesses searched-out the
appellant but he could not be traced, as statedly
he has been migrated to an unknown place &
changed his abode. He had also obtained
signatures of the elders of the locality on the

| warrant and submitted his report to the

Nawab (D.B) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Naeem Anwar
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Shahid Khan
-15-
concerned Court. He has further stated that he

had also visited the village of the appellant for
the execution of the proclamation notice, and in
presence of the witnesses, affixed the same on
the door of house of the appellant as well as on
the notice board of concerned District Courts
and other conspicuous places of the village.
When the question regarding absconsion of the
appellant was put to him during his statement
recorded U/S 342 Cr.P.C, he could not reply the
- same satisfactorily. The appellant has
iA admittedly been resident of the same village &
locality. He could not be arrested by the local
police despite being charged in a murder case.
In this respect sufficient materials in the form of
warrant U/S 204 Cr.P.C and proclamation U/S
87 Cr.P.C have been brought by the prosecution
on the record, as such, it can thus safely be held
& concluded that the accused/appellant had
absconded so as to avoid his lawful arrest, after
the occurrence and lodging of the report.
15. Absconsion by itself cannot be

held sufficient for recording conviction on a

Nawab (D.B) Hon'ble Mr, Justice Muhammad Naeem Anwar
Hon'ble Mr. Justice Shahid Khan
-16-

capital charge, but when other reliable evidence
is available with the prosecution, then such a
prolonged unexplained absconsion may safely
be taken into account as a corroboratory piece
of evidence against an accused person. Hon’ble
Supreme Court of Pakistan in case titled
“Mawas_Khan_v/s_The State & another”

reported as PLD 2004 Supreme Court 330 has
held as under;-

“Besides that the factum of absconsion has rightly
been considered as corroboratory piece of evidence.
There is no cavil with the proposition that factum of
absconsion cannot altogether be ignored and
corroborative value of the abscondence carries
substantial weight.

5. We are not persuaded to agree with learned
Senior Advocate Supreme Court that no authentic
judgment is available to the effect that factum of
absconsion can be considered as corroboratory piece
of evidence. In view of the precedent law
incorporated in the authorities as mentioned
hereinabove on the basis whereof it can be inferred
safely that factum of absconsion can be considered
as corroboratory piece of evidence subject to certain
exceptions which are not available in this case.”

Further reliance in this respect

may also be placed on the judgments reported

as PLD 1978 Supreme Court 103 and 2001 SCMR

177.

16. In light of what has been
discussed above, the prosecution had been able
to prove their case against the appellant

through eyewitness-account of the occurrence

Nawab (D.B) Hon'ble Mr, Justice Muhammad Naeem Anwar
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Shahid Khan
-17-
offered by PW-6 and PW-7, respectively.

There has also been corroboratory evidence
available against the appellant in the shape of
his unexplained & willful absconsion and
identification of the place of occurrence as well

as the medical evidence/report of the dead
body of the deceased, therefore, the
prosecution, on all counts, successfully proved
their case beyond reasonable doubt against the
appellant and the learned trial Court has rightly
found him guilty of the commission of the
offence.

17. In light of the above re-appraisal of
the evidence of prosecution coupled with the legal
principles on the subject, the conviction &
sentence recorded by the learned Additional
Sessions Judge 1% / Izafi Zila Qazi, Dir Upper,
through the impugned order/judgment dated,
17.02.2022, is upheld & maintained and

consequently, the subject appeal is dismissed.

Date of announcement

Dt. 20.06.2023 .
Date of writing judgment
Dt. 03.07.2023 JUDGE

s
s JU
%
ol oi” Nawab (D.B) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Naeem Anwar

A KX Hon’ble Mr. Justice Shahid Khan
‘
