JUDGMENT SHEET
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
MINGORA BENCH (DAR-UL-QAZA), SWAT
(Judicial Department)

Cr.A No. 183-M/2015

(1) Said Karam alias Ajarr s/o Yousuf Khan (Appellant)
Versus

(1) The State
(2) Sher Muhammad s/o Said Muhammad alias Sheikh
(Respondents)

Present: Mr, Badi-uz-Zaman Khan, Advocate for the
appellant.

Mr. Rafiq Ahmad, Astt: Advocate General for the
State.

Mr. Aftab Khan, Advocate for the
complainant/respondent No. 2.

Cr.R No. 39-M/2015

(1) Ghani Muhammad s/o Abdul Jalil
(2) Sher Muhammad s/o Said Muhammad alias Sheikh
(Petitioners)

Versus
(1) Said Karam alias Ajarr s/o Yousuf Khan

(2) Ibrahim s/o Said Karam alias Ajarr

(3) State through A.A.G.
(Respondents)

Present: Mr. Aftab Khan, Advocate for the petitioners.

Mr. Rafig Ahmad, Astt: Advocate General for the
State.

Mr, Badi-uz-Zaman Khan, Advocate for the
respondent/convict.

Date of hearing: 03.10.2018

CONSOLIDATED
JUDGMENT

SYED ARSHAD ALI, J.- Through this single
judgment, we intend to decide this criminal
appeal bearing No. 183-M/2015 as well as

NAWABI/PS* DB: Mr. Justice Muhammad Ghazanfar Khan
Mr. Justice Syed Arshad Ali
connected Cr.R bearing No. 39-M/2015 as
both these matters emanate from one and the
same judgment dated 07.07.2015 rendered by
the learned Sessions Judge/ Zilla Qazi, Buner
at Dagger, in case F.I.R No. 392 dated
21.06.2013 under sections 302, 34 of the
Pakistan Penal Code, 1860 (“PPC”) read with
section 13 of Pakistan Arms Ordinance, 1965
(“A.O”) registered at Police Station Nawagai,
District Buner, whereby the appellant namely
Said Karam alias Ajarr was convicted under
section 302 (b) PPC and sentenced to life
imprisonment (on two counts) as Ta ’zir along
with payment of compensation of
Rs.1,000,000/- (rupees one million) payable to
the legal heirs of both the deceased as per their
respective Shari share under section 544-A,
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (“Cr.P.C”)
or in default thereof he was ordered to
undergo further six (6) months of simple
imprisonment after completion of substantive
sentence. The accused/appellant was further

convicted under section 13 A.O. and

NAWAB/PS* DB: Mr. Justice Muhammad Ghazanfar Khan
Mr. Justice Syed Arshad Ali
sentenced to three (3) years imprisonment
with a fine of Rs. 3,000/- (rupees three
thousand) or in default thereof shall further
undergo one (1) month simple imprisonment.
However, the accused/appellant was extended
the benefit of section 382-B Cr.P.C.

2. The prosecution case is that on
21.06.2013 at 20:15 hours the then
injured/complainant, now deceased Fayaz
Muhammad, who at the relevant time was in
his senses reported the matter to the local
police in the emergency ward of Dagger
hospital that on the day of occurrence a
quarrel had taken place between his uncle
namely Amir Mahmood and Said Karam alias
Ajarr (accused/appellant), however, both of
them were later calmed by the people of the
locality. The complainant was on his way
towards the house of his uncle namely
Amir Mahmood to inquire about the dispute,
when he reached near the house of one Israr,
where he saw that his grandfather namely

Abdul Jalil (deceased) and Said Karam alias

NAWABI/PS* DB: Mr. Justice Muhammad Ghazanfar Khan
Mr. Justice Syed Arshad Ali
Ajarr were in a heated argument with each
other. In the meanwhile, Said Karam alias
Ajarr took out his pistol and fired at
complainants’ grandfather Abdul Jalil in order
to commit his Qatl-e-amd, as a result of which
he was hit and died at the spot. At that
moment, Ibrahim son of Said Karam alias
Ajarr (absconding accused) duly armed with
pistol came there and started firing upon the
complainant. Due to shots fired by the
accused, the complainant was hit on different
parts of his body which resulted in him
sustaining seriously injuries. In the same
breath the complainant also mentioned the
motive behind the occurrence as prior to the
occurrence accused Said Karam had hit the
dog of his uncle Amir Mahmood by throwing
a stone at it, which lead to the quarrel between
them. In addition to the complainant the
occurrence is stated to have been witnessed by
Nazeer Gul son of Bacha Gul (PW-4) and

Israr son of Amir Mahmood (PW-3).

NAWAB/PS* DB: Mr. Justice Muhammad Ghazanfar Khan
Mr. Justice Syed Arshad Ali
3. After reducing the aforesaid
statement of the complainant in form of a
written report, Wakil Zada, ASI, PS Nawagai
(PW-5), read over the said report to the
complainant and explained the same to him.
The complainant after admitting the report to
be correct thumb impressed the same in token
of its correctness. The dead body of the
deceased namely Abdul Jalil was shifted to
Nawagai hospital for medical examination.
The said PW has also prepared an injury sheet
of the injuries caused to the body of the
injured Fayaz Muhammad (complainant) and
handed over the same to doctor Naeem PW
for further proceedings. The ‘Murasila’ Ex.
PA/1 was sent to Police Station (“PS”)
Nawagai through constable Habibullah, No.
1046, which culminated into FIR ibid Ex. PW-
11/5. Later, the complainant succumbed to the
injuries and died on 26.6.2013.

4. Investigation of the case was
entrusted to PW-14. The investigation officer

at PS Nawagai submitted challan before the

NAWAB/PS* DB: Mr. Justice Muhammad Ghazanfar Khan
Mr. Justice Syed Arshad Ali
court after completion of the investigation.
Since the accused were avoiding their lawful
arrest, therefore, proceedings under section
512 Cr.P.C were initially initiated against
them. Thereafter, upon arrest of the
accused/appellant supplementary challan was
submitted against him in the Court of learned
Sessions Judge/Zilla Qazi, Buner at Dagger.
At the commencement of the trial the
prosecution examined as many as 16
witnesses whose statements were recorded and
placed on file. On closure of the prosecution
evidence, accused was examined under section
342 Cr.P.C, wherein he denied the charges,
posed innocence and stated to have been
falsely implicated in the case.

5. On conclusion of the trial, the
learned Sessions Judge/Zilla Qazi, Buner at
Dagger, convicted and _ sentenced the
accused/appellant, vide the judgment
impugned herein, hence these connected

matters.

NAWAB/PS* DB: ‘Mr. Justice Muhammad Ghazanfar Khan
Mr. Justice Syed Arshad Ali
6. We have heard arguments of the
learned counsel for the accused/appellant,
learned counsel for the complainant and
learned Assistant Advocate General appearing
on behalf of the State and gone through the
record of the case with their able assistance.

Ts The entire case of the prosecution
hinges upon the dying declaration of the
injured/complainant Fayaz Muhammad which
was recorded in shape of ‘Murasila’ followed
by a FIR, statement of Wakil Zada, ASI, (PW-
5) who has recorded the statement/dying
declaration of the complainant and the
testimony of Israr Mohammad (PW-3) and
Nazir Gul (PW-4), who according to the
statement/dying declaration of the
complainant have witnessed the occurrence.

8. The foremost question for
determination before us is the veracity of
dying deceleration of the complainant qua its
corroboration by the ocular evidence.
According to the prosecution version as

narrated in Murasla Ex PA/1, which was

NAWAB/PS* — DB: Mr. Justice Muhammad Ghazanfar Khan
Mr. Justice Syed Arshad Ali
\
“aS

later on termed as the dying declaration of the
complainant, the time of occurrence was 18:15
hours whereas report of the complainant was
recorded on 20:15 hours by PW-5 i.e. Wakil
Zada, ASI, at Dagger hospital. The entire
record is silent about the distance from the
place of occurrence and Dagger hospital nor it
could be established from the record that who
had accompanied the complainant at the
relevant time from the place of occurrence to
the hospital. Even otherwise, the prosecution
has recorded statements of 16 PWs but they
did not utter a single word regarding
transferring of the complainant in such a
critical injured condition from the place of
occurrence to Dagger hospital.

The close perusal of the contents of the
Murasila, \ater termed as dying declaration,
would show that the complainant had
minutely and specifically narrated the entire
incident and has stated that he had sustained
serious injuries on different parts of his body

because of the shots fired by absconding

NAWAB/PS* DB: Mr. Justice Muhammad Ghazanfar Khan
Mr. Justice Syed Arshad Ali
accused Ibrahim whereas it was because of the
firing by present accused/appellant Said
Karam alias Ajarr that his grandfather Abdul
Jalil (deceased) was injured and died at the
spot. He has also stated that the said incident
was also witnessed by two (2) eyewitnesses of
the occurrence namely Nazir Gul and Israr
Mohammad. We have to see as to whether
despite sustaining such severe and serious
injuries, the complainant was still able to
narrate the incident with such a particularity
and precision. In this regard, the injury sheet
of the complainant Ex. PW-6/1 and the
postmortem report of the deceased Ex. PW-
10/1 are of paramount importance which show
the following injuries on the body of the then

injured now deceased.

Injury sheet:-

i) Entry wound below xipisternum-
epigastrium, exit wound back of
chest left side.

ii) Entry wound right groin. No exit
wound.

iii) Entry wound left iliac fossa. No exit
wound.

iv) Referred to LRH. Detailed
postmortem report is attached.
He expired in LRH on 25.6.2013.

NAWAB/PS* DB: Mr. Justice Muhammad Ghazanfar Khan
Mr. Justice Syed Arshad Ali
at's

Postmortem examination:-

a) A healing stitched firearm wound on the back
of left chest, 6cm from midline and 9 cm
above costal margin.

b) One surgically produce wound (drain) on left
outer chest, 6 cm lateral nipple and 9cm
below axilla.

c) A healing stretched firearm wound on front of
left side of chest, 3 cm from midline and 3 cm
above costal margin.

d) A healing stitched firearm wound on front of
left side of abdomen, 11 cm from midline and
2 cm below costal margin.

e) One surgically produced wound (drain) on
front of left lower abdomen, 12 cm from
midline.

f) One stitched laparotomy wound on midline on
front of abdomen.

Remarks:
In opinion of the doctor, the deceased died due to
injuries to left lung, liver spleen, diaphragm,
stomach and small intestines due to fire am.
Dr. Naeem-ul-Haq, (PW-6) who
furnished the medical evidence stated in his
cross-examination that at the time of
examination of the complainant blood was
still oozing from the injuries present on his
body. However, in the injury sheet Ex. PW-
6/1, he has not expressed his opinion as to
whether at the relevant time the complainant
was conscious and well oriented to narrate the

incident. It is also evident from the statement

of PW-5 who had reduced into writing the

NAWAB/PS* DB: ‘Mr. Justice Muhammad Ghazanfar Khan
Mr. Justice Syed Arshad Ali
.

-ll-

‘Murasila’/statement of the complainant in
shape of dying declaration that indeed he was
the first person who had seen the complainant
and recorded his statement and_ the
injured/complainant was examined by the
doctor after recording of his statement,
therefore, it was incumbent upon the said
doctor (PW-6) to have stated in the injury
sheet of the injured/complainant (Ex. PW-6/1)
about his physical condition as to whether he
was conscious at the relevant time and was
able to speak. Moreover, no time and date of
the examination of the complainant were
mentioned in the injury sheet (Ex. PW-6/1) by
the doctor nor was it mentioned as to who had
brought the injured to the hospital for medical
examination. Although, on the record, the
police had solicited on the same day the
opinion of the doctor through an application
(Ex. PW-5/l1) and on the same
application/request, the doctor had opined that

“he was conscious, well oriented and was able to

record his statement”. For this certificate, the

NAWAB/PS* DB: Mr. Justice Muhammad Ghazanfar Khan
Mr. Justice Syed Arshad Ali
[D's

said Dr. Naeem-ul-Haq (PW-6) was again
re-examined, however, from the bare reading
of the said certificate it shows that it was
provided subsequent to the examination of the
complainant. Moreover, in view of the
certificate being furnished by the Dr.
Naeem-ul-Haq, PW-6 with regard to
physical condition of the then
injured/complainant now deceased Fayaz
Muhammad to narrate the incident with
such a particularity despite presence of
severe firearm injuries on his body and that
too on his vital parts. In similar situation as
emerged in the present case, it has been
held by the august Supreme Court of
Pakistan in case of “Mst. Zahida Bibi vs
the State” reported as PLD 2006 Supreme
Court 255” :-

“The medical evidence revealed
that 70% body of the deceased was
burnt and this is a matter of
common sense that in such a

precarious condition, it was not

NAWAB/PS* DB: Mr. Justice Muhammad Ghazanfar Khan
Mr, Justice Syed Arshad Ali
-13-

possible for the deceased to narrate

the occurrence in such detail.”

9. Another intriguing aspect of
the case is that the doctor who is an
independent witness does not support the
statement of the complainant. The natural
course of happening would be that in the
hospital the said dying declaration must
have been recorded in the presence of the
doctor or other medical staff, who had
provided the first aid to the complainant
because it is not the prosecution case that
when the complainant was brought to the
hospital the medical team was not available
to provide first aid to the complainant.
Even otherwise it is hard to believe that in
presence of such serious injuries on the
body of the complainant he was able to
narrate the prosecution case with such
particularity of events that he even
mentioned the names of the witnesses who

despite his close relative did not bother to

NAWAB/PS* DB: Mr. Justice Muhammad Ghazanfar Khan
Mr, Justice Syed Arshad Ali
fhe

accompany the complainant and the
deceased to take them to hospital.

It is established principle of law that
dying declaration by itself is a weaker type of
evidence which needs corroboration through
confidence inspiring evidence. In this regard,
wisdom is derived from the case of “Tahir
Khan vs the State” (2011 SCMR 646) in the
following manner:-

“Mere dying declaration shrouded
by mystery and fraught with so many
infirmities is not enough to convict a
person. Dying declaration is weaker
type of evidence, which needs
corroboration when fully
corroborated by other reliable
evidence. Facts and circumstances of
each case have to be kept in view and
also credibility, reliability and
acceptability of such declaration by

Court.”

The aforesaid law laid down by the august

supreme court also reflects in the case of

“

Muhammad Ameer and another vs. Riyat

Khan_and_ others (2016 SCMR 1233).

Indeed relying solely on the dying declaration

NAWAB/PS* DB: Mr, Justice Muhammad Ghazanfar Khan
Mr. Justice Syed Arshad Ali
-15-

without other corroborative evidence being in
line and in support of the said dying
declaration would be against the basic
principles of the jurisprudence of criminal
administration of justice.

10. Now moving on to the statements
of the eye witnesses of the occurrence in
support of the afore-said dying declaration of
the complainant. Both the eyewitnesses are
not only closely related to the complainant but
highly interested, besides being the chance
witnesses. The fact that the testimony of
chance as well as interested witnesses can be
taken into account provided the same are
confidence inspiring, steadfast and free from
any kind of contradiction. Israr Mohammad
(PW-3) is the son of Amir Muhammad and it
is stated in the Murasila that earlier the said
Amir Muhammad had altercated with the
accused/appellant Said Karam alias Ajarr and
later the accused/appellant had also exchanged
heated words with the deceased

Abdul Jalil, His close relations with the

NAWABIPS* DB: Mr, Justice Muhammad Ghazanfar Khan
Mr. Justice Syed Arshad Ali
=G =

deceased is admitted by him in his cross
examination. However, the conduct exhibited
by him soon after the occurrence is very
unusual which creates serious doubts
regarding his presence on the scene of
occurrence. Despite the fact that it is stated
that he had witnessed the occurrence he
neither accompanied the deceased (Abdul
Jalil) nor the complainant to the hospital. He
has affirmed in his cross examination that “/
did not accompany the deceased and the
injured to the hospital. Nazir Muhammad also
did not accompany with them to the hospital.
Both of us remained on spot and then went to
our houses.” Even, this PW further admitted
in his cross-examination that he did not
participate in the funeral of the deceased and
he spent the entire day in his house. It is also
in the evidence of the said PW that he was
working as labourer at Rawalpindi. He has
also made dishonest improvement in_ his

statement regarding material facts.

NAWAB/PS* DB: Mr. Justice Muhammad Ghazanfar Khan
Mr, Justice Syed Arshad Ali
oer

«fF =

Moving forward to the testimony
of the other eyewitness Nazir Gul (PW-4), the
said witness is the son-in-law of the deceased
Abdul Jalil and despite the fact that he had
allegedly seen the occurrence but neither he
accompanied the deceased to the hospital nor
the complainant and they (deceased and
complainant) both were left at the mercy of
others to take them to the hospital.

11. Another damaging factor for the
prosecution case is change of stance from their
statement recorded under section 164 Cr.PC
followed by their initial court statement
recoded under section 512 CR.PC where both,
the eyewitnesses have stated that on the day of
occurrence the police had come to the spot and
had taken the dead bodies of the deceased
along with blood stained earth coupled with
the fact that in their presence the police had
also taken pictures of the crime venue.
However, during court statements, both the
eyewitnesses have made considerable

improvements in their testimony whereby a

NAWABIPS* —_ DB: Mr. Justice Muhammad Ghazanfar Khan
Mr. Justice Syed Arshad All
-18-

different story was narrated. These material
contradictions and improvements coupled
with unnatural conduct of the alleged
eyewitnesses are sufficient to take their
testimony out of consideration. Indeed it is
evident from their statement that both the PWs
are working for gain at the town other than
where the occurrence has taken place therefore
they happen to be the chance witnesses. Hence
it was incumbent upon them to have
established the reasons for their presence with
supportive evidence. In this regard reliance is
placed on the case of “Mst. Rukhsana
Begum and others vs. Sajjad and others”
(2017 SCMR 596) wherein it has been held:-

“Chance witness was one who, in
the normal course was not
supposed to be present on the crime
spot unless he offered cogent,
convincing and believable
explanation, justifying his presence
there.”

And regarding their testimony which is based
on improvements, the august Supreme Court

in similar circumstances has discarded the

NAWABI/PS* DB; Mr. Justice Muhammad Ghazanfar Khan
Mr. Justice Syed Arshad Ali
wfGn

statement of such witnesses. The Hounorable
Supreme Court of Pakistan in case

“Muhammad Mansha vs. The State” (2018

SCMR 772) has held that it is unsafe to rely
on the statement of such witnesses who had
made dishonest improvements in their

statements.

12. The upshot of the afore-said
discourse is that the entire prosecution
evidence in respect of guilt of the
accused/appellant is shrouded in mystery and
the true facts have been concealed and it also
discerns from record that the complainant was
accompanied by number of his co-villagers/
relatives at the time of recording of his
statement at Dagger hospital but for reasons
best known to prosecution their statements
were not recorded, therefore, the possibility
cannot be ruled out that the name of
accused/appellant might have been provided
to Wakil Zada, ASI, (PW-5) by the said

relatives of the deceased.

NAWAB/PS* DB: Mr. Justice Muhammad Ghazanfar Khan
Mr. Justice Syed Arshad Ali
=d6<

13. It is also on the record that the
civil hospital at Nawagai is at a distance of
two (2) kilometers from the place of
occurrence and the deceased was initially
taken to that hospital, therefore, the possibility
that the complainant was also firstly taken to
the said civil hospital and then to Dagger
hospital cannot be ruled out because the
record is completely silent as to who had
taken the deceased and complainant to the
hospital. In the meantime, there was enough
opportunity for the relatives of the
deceased/complainant to deliberate and
consult with each other in order to incriminate
the present accused/appellant.

14. We are also conscious of the fact
that the accused/appellant remained absconder
for more than 7 months. However, by know it
is settled law that such abscendance could not
be made sole basis of conviction of accused
when the other prosecution evidence is
doubtful and riddled with contradiction.

Guidance in this regard is taken from the

NAWAB/PS* DB: Mr. Justice Muhammad Ghazanfar Khan
Mr. Justice Syed Arshad Ali
= 97 -

judgment of the apex court passed in
Muhammad Sadiq versus the State (2017
SCMR 144). In support of the same ratio,
reliance is further placed on the case of
“Rohtas Khan vs the State” reported as 2010
SCMR 566”, wherein it has been held:-

“Abscondence of accused can never
remedy the defects in the
prosecution case”.

In the above backdrop and_ after
reappraisal of entire evidence, this Court is of
the firm view that the prosecution case against
the accused/appellant has not been proved
beyond any reasonable doubt and _ the
judgment of learned trial Court is based on
wrong appreciation of evidence. Hence, we
accept this appeal and set-aside the impugned
judgment rendered by the learned trial Court.
Therefore, the accused/appellant is acquitted
of the charges leveled against him. He is in
custody and be set free if not required in any
other case.

15. These are the reasons of our short

order of even date.

NAWAB/PS* DB: Mr. Justice Muhammad Ghazanfar Khan
Mr. Justice Syed Arshad Ali
one

is
wr

wigDia

16. Likewise, the connected criminal
revision bearing No. 39-M of 2015 preferred
by legal heirs of both the deceased/petitioners

having become infructuous is hereby

dismissed.
Announced
03.10.2018
JU
7er ia
JUDGE

NAWAB/PS* DB; Mr. Justice Muhammad Ghazanfar Khan
Mr. Justice Syed Arshad Ali
