JUDGMENT SHEET

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
D.IL.KHAN BENCH

(Judicial Department)

Cr.A. No.65-D/2019

Muhammad Ramzan
Vs
State and two others

JUDGMENT

For Appellant: ‘Muhammad Ismail Alizai, Advocate
For Respondents: Nemo (Being in motion

Date of hearing 26.01.2021

RK

SAHIBZADA ASADULLAH, J.- This appeal calls in
question the judgment dated 26.6.2019, rendered by the learned
Additional Sessions Judge Paharpur, D.J.Khan, whereby the
respondents No.2 & 3 were acquitted of the charges in case FIR
No.62 dated 09.04.2016, under Sections 302/324/109/34 PPC of

Police Station Kirri Khaisore, District D.I.Khan.

2. The prosecution story as disclosed in the FIR Ex: PA,
registered on the basis of murasila Ex. PA/1, in brief, is that on
09.4.2016 at about 17:50 hours, complainant Muhammad Ramzan
(PW-12) while present with dead-body of his son Muhammad Ayub,

reported the matter at Kirri Khaisore Adda to Ubaidullah ASI (PW-5),
a ed

to the effect that on the day of occurrence, he alongwith his son came to
Adda Kirri Khaisore on a motorbike driven by his son, for purchase of
household articles and at 05:30 p.m stopped at petrol agency of one
Qayyum Nawaz for filling petrol in the motorbike. In the
meanwhile, accused Maqbool Ahmad and Mushtaq Ahmad, while
armed with pistols, came there and started firing at them with their
respective pistols, as a result whereof, his son Muhammad Ayub got
hit, fell on the ground and breathed his last, while he fortunately
escaped unhurt. After commission of the offence, the accused
succeeded to decamp from the spot. Motive for the offence is given
as the deceased had contracted love marriage with Mst. Amna Bibi
which matter was settled privately between both the families,
however, the accused being paternal cousins of said lady committed
the offence. The occurrence was stated to be witnessed by PW
Ghulam Mursileen (abandoned being won-over). On the report of
complainant, PW-5 drafted Murasila Ex.PA/1, prepared injury
sheet Ex. PW 5/1, inquest report Ex. PW 5/2 and despatched the
dead-body to hospital for post-mortem examination under the escort
of constable Muhammad Nawaz (PW-6). The murasila was sent to
the Police Station for the registration of FIR where FIR Ex.PA was
registered against the accused while its copy was handed over to

Zulfiqar Ali (PW-13) for investigation. The Investigating
\

Officer proceeded to the spot where he prepared site plan Ex. PW
13/1, secured two empties of 9 mm from places of accused and a led
bullet, a motorbike of deceased vide recovery memo Ex. PW 10/1,
received FSL reports regarding empties, led bullet and blood-stained
earth, Ex.PK and Ex.PK/1 respectively. The I.0. conducted house
search of accused where he took into possession a motorcycle
belonging to accused which they used in the commission of offence.
He recorded statements of witnesses and on completion of
investigation handed over the case file to the S.H.O, who submitted
complete challan against the accused to the learned trial Court,
where at the commencement of the trial the prosecution produced
and examined as many as thirteen (13) witnesses, whereafter,
accused were examined under section 342, Cr.P.C., wherein they
denied the allegations, professed innocence, however, they did not
opt to be examined on oath in terms of Section 342, Cr.P.C. nor
produced evidence in their defence. After conclusion of the trial,
learned trial Court vide judgment impugned herein acquitted the

accused, hence the instant appeal.

3. Heard. Record perused.

4. The learned counsel for the appellant submitted that
the impugned judgment is arbitrary, mechanical, perverse and

without application of judicial mind to the facts and circumstances
of the case. It was further argued that the prosecution proved its case
against the respondents to the hilt; and that the learned trial court did
not appreciate the available evidence in its true perspective and that
the impugned judgment is based on conjectures and surmises which
needs interference. He lastly submitted that despite the fact the
prosecution produced two reliable witnesses who were thoroughly
cross-examined but nothing favourable to the respondents was

extracted.

5. This court is to see as to whether the witnesses were
present on the spot at the time when the deceased was done to death
and as to whether the incident occurred in the mode, manner and at
the stated time, however, this court is conscious of the fact that it
was after a full dressed trial that the respondents were acquitted of
the charges, whose acquittal has been challenged through the instant
criminal appeal. There is no cavil to the proposition that once an
accused is acquitted of the charges he earns double presumption of
innocence and extra ordinary circumstances are needed to upset the
same. The parameter for an appeal against acquittal and that of
conviction are altogether different. Needless to emphasize that
when an accused is acquitted from the charge by a Court of
competent jurisdiction then, double presumption of innocence
is attached to its order, with which the superior Courts do not
interfere unless the impugned order is arbitrary, capricious,

fanciful and against the record as the law relating to reappraisal
of evidence in appeals against acquittal is stringent in that the
presumption of innocence is doubled and multiplied after a
findings of not guilty recorded by a competent Court of law.
Such findings cannot be reversed until and unless extra ordinary
circumstances are pointed out. Law requires that a judgment of
acquittal shall not be disturbed even though second opinion

may be reasonably possible.

6. The incident occurred at 17:30 pm when the
complainant alongwith his deceased son visited local petrol pump to
fuel their motorcycle, when in the meanwhile the respondents
appeared duly armed started firing at the deceased, who got hit fell
to the ground and died on the spot. The matter was stated to be
witnessed besides the complainant by one Mursaleen who though
was later on abandoned being won-over, but at the earliest his
statement was recorded by the investigating officer u/s 161 Cr.PC
and later on by the court of Judicial Magistrate u/s 164 Cr.PC.
Wherein, PW Mursaleen gave the detailed description of what he
saw while present near the place of incident. He through his 164
Cr.PC statement unfolded the events in the manner, that on the
eventful day he after purchasing cigarettes from the shop of one
Ghulam Sadiq was standing on the road side when in the meanwhile
the deceased Muhammad Ayub approached the local filling station
to fuel his motorcycle, soon thereafter the respondents Mushtaq

Ahmed reached to the filling station and started firing at the
deceased, who on receiving fire shots fell to the ground. On hearing
the fire shots he alongwith other people rushed towards the deceased
but by then the deceased had died. He further stated that after 15/20
minutes father of the deceased Muhammad Ramzan alongwith PW
Abdul Hameed and one Yaqub reached to the place of incident and

on arrival of the local police the complainant reported the matter.

7. The complainant was examined as PW-12, who stated
that on the day of incident when he alongwith his deceased son
reached to the petrol pump, the accused duly armed approached the
petrol pump and started firing at the deceased which resulted into his
death. He further stated that the incident was witnessed by one
Mursaleen as well. When the statement of the complainant is placed
in juxtaposition with the statement of PW Mursaleen, which he
recorded before the court of Judicial Magistrate u/s 164 Cr.PC, both
the statements do not support each other rather the statement of the
complainant is in glaring contradiction with that of Mursaleen, as in
his statement recorded by the court of Judicial Magistrate, he
categorically stated that the deceased at the time of incident was all
alone and that it was only the respondent Mushtaq Ahmed, who fired
at the deceased. This witness remained silent on the presence of
complainant at the time of incident and even he did not mention the
presence of PW Muhammad Rafique at the time of incident. It is
from there that we gathered an impression that the complainant
alongwith two others reached to the spot after 15/20 minutes of the

occurrence. The statement so recorded by PW Mursaleen is further

strengthened from the fact that the matter was reported by the
complainant after 30 minutes of arrival of the local police. We are
anxious to know that when the complainant was present on the spot
at the time of incident why he did not shift the deceased to the
hospital or police station to report the matter. It is intriguing that the
complainant kept on waiting till arrival of the local police, to report
the matter despite the fact that the vehicles were available to shift the

dead body.

8. The delay caused in reporting the matter leaves no
ambiguity in our mind that the complainant was not present at the
time of incident and that it was after the deceased was done to death
his attendance was procured. To clarify the issue in hand we deem it
appropriate to touch the statement of the eye witness Muhammad
Rafique, who was examined as PW-11. PW Muhammad Rafique
stated that on the day of incident he had gone to a barber shop
situated near the place of occurrence to shave, where he saw the
deceased and the complainant fuelling their motorcycle at the local
petrol pump/agency, where the respondent appeared and started
firing at the deceased, which resulted into his death. This is
surprising to note that during cross examination PW-11 stated that it
was at 06:30 pm, when the police arrived to the spot and examined
the dead body, but the report of the complainant was not taken

down. He went on to say that after arrival of the investigating officer

at 07:30 pm, the complaitant reported the matter and thereafter the
dead body was shifted to the hospital. The explanation so tendered
does not appeal to a prudent mind, rather an inference can be drawn
that neither the complainant nor the eye witness were present when
the deceased was done to death and that on arrival of the local police
soon after the incident preliminary investigation was made and when
the presence of the complainant was procured the matter was
reported. The complainant who was examined as PW-12, stated that
he did not put his signature or thumb impression on the document
prepared by the investigating officer on the spot. He explained that
on the day of incident he visited the local police station twice i.e.
once soon after the incident and the second at 11:30 pm, when he
was called from the police station to approach. Our anxiety increases
to know that why the complainant was called to the police station
two times on the day of incident when the report had already been
made. The scribe was examined as PW-5, who stated that soon after
the incident he received information and on his arrival to the spot he
found the complainant present with the dead body, who reported the
matter. PW-5 could not explain the source of information whereas
the complainant stated that it was one Sharif Ullah, who informed
the police on his mobile phone, but surprisingly his statement was

not recorded.
9. The investigating officer visited the spot, recovered
blood stained earth from the place of deceased, two empties of 9mm
with a spent bullet alongwith the motorcycle of the deceased. The
site plan was prepared at the instance of the complainant where the
presence of PW Mursaleen is shown, whereas PW-1I1 figures
nowhere. It is admitted on record that PW-11 is the first cousin of
the complainant and was running a local flour machine at his village,
when he was cross examined he admitted that he is running the flour
mill all alone with no helper. If we take what he stated to be correct
then this witness should have been present at the place of his work
and his presence at the place of incident does not appeal to a prudent
mind. Had he been present on the spot his name would have been
mentioned by the complainant while reporting the matter. The
prosecution is to explain that why two most important witnesses i.e.
Mursaleen and Abdul Qayum were not examined, as they were the
first, who rushed towards the deceased when he received the firearm
injuries. This is undisputed that both these witnesses are independent
and are not related to the complainant. The importance of PW
Mursaleen cannot be ignored as he was the witness whose presence
was admitted by the complainant as an eye witness. There is no cavil
to the proposition that when a best available evidence is not

produced an inference can be drawn that had he been produced he
®

-10-

would have not supported the case of the prosecution. The situation
in hand is better guided and controlled by article 129(g) of the

Qanoon-e-Shahdat Order, 1984, as is held in case titled_Tahir Khan

Vs. The State (2011 SCMR 646):

In the present case as observed above, the
clouds over the veracity of the prosecution
version began hovering with the substitution
of the initially nominated persons in the
F.LR. and also that complainant did not
appear as a witness. It assumes relevance as
he (Ghulam Hussain), Sultan Mehmood and
Ghulam Abbas were given up by the
prosecution and not produced. The only
possible conclusion is that the prosecution
sensed the risk of producing them that they
might not support the said version. Their
production thus was withheld leaving doubts

spreading all around”.
10. The recovered empties were sent to Forensic Science
Laboratory by the investigating officer to ascertain as to whether
those were fired from one or different weapons. The empties were
received to the Laboratory on 14.04.2016, where, after chemical
analysis it transpired that the same were fired from one and the same
weapon. The Laboratory report discredits the integrity of the
complainant as the complainant has thrown the net wide by

implicating two real brothers in the episode. There is no denial to the
®

-ll-

fact that the Laboratory report is corroborative piece of evidence and
cannot be used to discredit the trust worthy eye witness account
provided the eye witness account is trust worthy, but in case in hand
the eye witnesses failed to establish their presence on the spot and
that their statements are in conflict with each other that too with

dishonest improvements. The laboratory report confirms that it

was the doing of one person. In case titled “The State through

A.G Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Vs Subhan Ali and another” (2020

MELD 1901), wherein it is held that:

The Investigating Officer recovered
three empties of 7.62 bore from the spot,
which were sent to the office of chemical
examiner with a request to tender its opinion,
as to whether these were fired from one or
different weapons, the report has been
exhibited as Ex: PW10/6, where these empties
were shown fired from one and the same
weapon. The deceased has three inlet wounds
and three empties were recovered from the
spot with opinion from the Forensic Sciences
Laboratory as having been fired from one and
the same weapon belies the stance of the
complainant regarding the involvement of two

accused in commission of the offence.
11. The medical evidence is in conflict with the ocular
account. The site plan was prepared at the instance of the

complainant where the deceased and the assailants are shown at a

-12-

distance of 03 paces from each other. We cannot ignore that the
weapon used was stated to be 9mm pistol and that the charring and
blackening marks occur only when a pistol is fired from a distance
of 09 inches or less. In case in hand all the entry wounds are
surrounded by blackening, which is not possible from the distance
given by the complainant, which also indicates that the complainant

was not present at the time of incident. This conflict between the
medical evidence and ocular account has crept deep into the
roots of the prosecution case. True that the medical evidence is
confirmatory in nature and when direct ocular account is
available on file, then in that eventuality it is the ocular account
which is to be preferred and taken into consideration, provided
it is confidence inspiring, but in case in hand the presence of the
witnesses at the time and at the place of incident is shrouded in
mystery, so the conflict between the two cannot be ignored and

it is for the prosecution to prove otherwise.

In case titled “Akhter Saleem and another Vs_the

State and another” (2019 MLD 1107), it is held that:

The above factors, material contradictions
between ocular and medical evidence
create serious doubts in the happening of

alleged occurrence and it is well settled
®)

-13-

law that even a single doubt, if found
reasonable, would entitle the accused
person to acquittal and not a combination

of several doubts.”
12. The motive was stated to be the elopement of Mst.
Amina with the deceased, who was already married to one
Muhammad Bilal in which respect case FIR No.90, dated
11.06.2014, u/s 496-A/506/342 PPC was registered. It is pertinent to
mention that the said lady performed Nikah with the deceased and is
still residing at his house. We cannot ignore that it was the
complainant who stated that the matter between the parties had
already been patched up, when the matter had already been patched
up then what was the need for the respondents to kill the deceased.
We have no other option but to hold that the prosecution failed to
establish the motive. Even otherwise the investigating officer did not
collect any independent evidence in that respect. He did not take
pains to record the statement of Mst. Amina to confirm the motive.
There is no cavil to the proposition that once the prosecution
alleges a motive then it is its duty to prove the same failing

which it is the prosecution to suffer and the present case is no

exception, as is held in case titled "Muhammad Ashraf _alias

Acchu Ys The State" (2019 SCMR 652 Para-7), wherein it has been

held: -
-14-

The motive is always a double-edged
weapon. The complainant Sultan Ahmad
(PW9) has admitted murder enmity between
the parties and has also given details of the
same in his statement recorded before the
trial court. No doubt, previous enmity can be
a reason for the appellant to commit the
alleged crime, but it can equally be a reason
for the complainant side to falsely implicate
the appellant in this case for previous

grouse."

13. For what has been stated above, this court reaches to
an inescapable conclusion that the prosecution failed to prove its
case against the respondents and even the witnesses could not
establish their presence on the spot. The learned trial court has
comprehensively dealt with the matter in hand as such the impugned
judgment is well reasoned which calls for no interference. This

appeal is bereft of merit stands dismissed.

Announced.
Dt: 26.01.2021 oo
*Kifayat/*
JUDGE
JUDGE
@.B)

Hon'ble Mr. Justice Abdul Shakeor
Hon'ble Mr. Justice Sahibzada Asadullah
