JUDGEMENT SHEET
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
BANNU BENCH

(Judicial Department)

Cr.A No.281-B of 2016

Jawad-ul-Haq
Vs
The State.

JUDGEMENT
Date of hearing 07.11.2017

Appellant-Petitioner: By Muhammad Rashid
Khan _ Dhirma_ Khel,
Advocate.

Respondent: By Shahid Hameed Qureshi,

Addl: AG.

ABDUL SHAKOOR, J.- This criminal appeal is
directed against the judgment dated 20.4.2016
passed by the Additional Sessions Judge, Banda
Daud Shah, District Karak, whereby appellant
Jawad-ul-Haq was convicted and sentenced under
section 302 (b) PPC to imprisonment for life on
two counts for charge of committing Qatl-e-amd
of deceased Imtiaz Amin and Mst. Dilshad Begum
with payment of fine Rs.2,00,000/-(two lacs) to be

deposited to State. In default whereof he shall
-2-

undergo for one year S.I. Under section 15 Arm

Act, he was sentenced for 05 years R.I with a fine

of Rs.30,000/-. In default whereof he shall

undergo for further 06 months S.I. Benefit of

section 382-B Cr.P.C was extended to the

accused/appellant.

2 Precisely, the facts of the prosecution

case, as per FIR, are that on 17.4.2015

complainant brought the dead bodies of deceased

Mst. Dilshad Begum wife of Muhammad Naseer

and Imtiaz Alam son of Zargham and lodged a

report in Police Station Banda Daud Shah to the

effect that on the eventful night he and other

members of his family were asleep in the house of

his son Muhammad Ishfaq. At about 0100 hours

he heard the noise of fire shots. He awaken and

saw his grandson namely Jawad

(convict/appellant) who on seeing both the

deceased in compromising position killed them.

Motive stated by the complainant was that the

(D.B) Justice Ikramullah Khan and Justice Abdul Shakoor.
-3-

accused on seeing both the deceased in

compromising position.

3. The convict/appellant was arrested

and after completion of investigation complete

challan against the accused was put in Court.

Accused was produced in custody. Provisions of

section 265-C Cr.P.C complied with and

thereafter he was formally charge sheeted under

sections 302/15AA, to which he pleaded not

guilty and claimed trial.

4. Trial commenced and the prosecution

in order to prove its case, examined as many as

eleven witnesses. After closure of the prosecution

evidence, statement of the accused was recorded

under section 342 Cr.P.C, wherein he pleaded

innocence, however, he neither wished to produce

evidence in defence nor to be examined on oath

under section 340(2) Cr.P.C. After conclusion of

the trial, the learned trial Court after hearing

(D.B) Justice Ikramullah Khan and Justice Abdul Shakoor.
-4-

arguments of counsel for the parties, convicted

and sentenced him as mentioned above.

5. Feeling aggrieved by the judgment of

the learned trial Court, Jawad-ur-Haq, the

appellant impugned the same through filing

instant Cr. Appeal.

6. Learned counsel for the appellant

argued that impugned judgment of the learned

Trial Court is against the law, facts and evidence

available on record; that the learned trial Court

has convicted the appellant on flimsy and

capricious grounds by misreading and none

reading the evidence on record; that the

occurrence has taken place in dark hours of night

which has admittedly remained un-witnessed and

the accused has been charged only on the basis of

suspicion. He further argued that it is unbelievable

that a person after committing a double murder

will wait in his house for the arrival of police and

will hand over two weapons to them with a

(D.B) Justice Ikramullah Khan and Justice Abdul Shakoor.
-5-

confession that he has committed the offence. He

further argued that the medical evidence is in

complete contrast to the story set up in the FIR

and circumstantial evidence does not support the

prosecution version. He lastly argued that the

instant appeal deserve to be allowed and the

accused/appellant be acquitted from the charges

alleged against him.

7. Conversely, learned AAG

representing the State argued that appellant is

directly charged for effective firing at the

deceased; that ocular account furnished by the

PWSs is straight forward and confidence inspiring

which is corroborated by medical evidence, site

plan, recoveries of blood and empties from the

spot; that the prosecution has successfully proved

the guilt of the appellant through overwhelming

evidence available on record and sought

dismissal of the appeal of the appellant.

(D.B) Justice Ikramullah Khan and Justice Abdul Shakoor.
-6-

&. Valuable arguments of learned

counsel for the parties and AAG representing the

State heard and record perused.

9. According to the contents of FIR, the

complainant and other inmates of the house are

the eye witnesses of the occurrence but in cross

examination the complainant (PW-10) admitted

that he heard the noise of firing at about after

1100 p.m. He was sleeping in the house of

Muhammad Ishfaq and the occurrence had taken

place in the house of Muhammad Nasseer, which

is situated at a distance of 50/100 paces from the

house of Muhammad Ishfaq. He further admitted

that he has not seen the accused at the time of

firing and that after the occurrence Muhammad

Jalil and Muhammad Razzaq also reached to the

spot. Before charging the accused they consulted

the enquiry with one another. He also admitted in

cross examination that he is not eye witness of the

occurrence. In a criminal case, the evidence

(D.B) Justice Ikramullah Khan and Justice Abdul Shakoor.
-7-

produced by the prosecution should be so strong

or solid that it should start right from the toe of

the deceased on one hand and the same should

encircle a dense grip around the neck of the

accused on the other hand and if the chain is not

complete or any doubt which occurred in the

prosecution's case that is sufficient to demolish

the structure of evidence and the benefit of doubt

must go to the accused especially when the same

has been built up on the basis of feeble or shaky

evidence. It is also settled law that not many

circumstances creating doubt in the prosecution

story are required but only one circumstance

creating doubt in the prosecution story is enough

to acquit the accused. Reliance can easily be

placed upon 2009 SCMR 230 wherein the Hon'ble

Supreme Court has held as under:--

"For giving the benefit of doubt it is not
necessary that there should be many
circumstances creating doubts---Single
circumstance creating reasonable doubt in a
prudent mind about the guilt of accused
makes him entitled to its benefit, not as a
matter of grace and concession, but as a
matter of right."

(D.B) Justice Ikramullah Khan and Justice Abdul Shakoor.
10. The motive advanced by the

prosecution remained unproved. No shred of

evidence whatsoever has been led to prove as to

where and in whose presence the deceased were

present in compromise position as alleged by the

complainant in his report. It is settled law that

where the motive remains unproved, then the

ocular account would be considered with great

care and caution. Complainant, no doubt appeared

as solitary witness, who happens to be the father

in law of deceased Mst. Dilshad Begum. No

doubt, conviction can be recorded on the basis of

solitary statement of a witness having close

relation with the deceased or victim provided the

same is trustworthy, confidence inspiring and

corroborated by strong circumstances of the case.

Besides, an eyewitness who claimed his presence

at the spot, to make his testimony believable and

reliable, must satisfy the mind of the court

(D.B) Justice Ikramullah Khan and Justice Abdul Shakoor.
-9-

through some physical circumstances or through

some corroborative evidence about his presence at

the spot.

11. Mere recovery of blood from the

spot, bloodstained last worn garments of the

deceased coupled with positive Serologist report

and recovery of empties from the spot, in absence

of direct evidence, would not be sufficient to

sustain conviction of accused in capital charge.

Such recoveries are always considered as

corroborative pieces of evidence, which are

always taken into consideration along with direct

evidence and not in isolation.

12. We are of the firm view that

prosecution has miserably failed to bring home

the guilt of appellant through cogent and

confidence inspiring evidence beyond shadow of

doubt. The prosecution evidence is pregnant with

doubts and according to golden principle of

benefit of doubt one substantial doubt would be

(D.B) Justice Ikramullah Khan and Justice Abdul Shakoor.
-10-

enough for acquittal of the accused. The rule of

benefit of doubt is essentially a rule of prudence,

which cannot be ignored while dispensing justice

in accordance with law. Conviction must be based

on unimpeachable evidence and certainty of guilt

and any doubt arising in the prosecution case,

must be resolved in favour of the accused. The

said rule is based on the maxim " it is better that

ten guilty persons be acquitted rather than one

innocent person be convicted" which occupied a

pivotal place in the Islamic Law and is enforced

strictly in view of the saying of the Holy Prophet

(PBUH) that the "mistake of Qazi (Judge) in

releasing a criminal is better than his mistake in

punishing an innocent". Wisdom in this regard

can also be derived from the judgments of the

apex court in case titled, "Muhammad Khan

and another v. The State" (1999 SCMR 1220)

and case titled, "Muhammad Ikram v. The

State" (2009 SCMR 230). The learned trial Court

(D.B) Justice Ikramullah Khan and Justice Abdul Shakoor.
-ll-

has not evaluated the evidence in its true

perspective and thus reached to an erroneous

conclusion by holding the appellant guilty of the

offence. Resultantly, this appeal is allowed.

Conviction and sentences of the appellant are set

aside and he is acquitted of the charges leveled

against him. He be set at liberty forthwith, if not

required in any other case.

These are the detailed reasons of my short

order of even date.

Announced
07.11.2017
JUDGE.
JUDGE.
Thsan.-*

(D.B) Justice Ikramullah Khan and Justice Abdul Shakoor.
