JUDGMENT SHEET

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
PESHAWAR
(Judicial Department)

Cr.A No. 892-P of 2021
Barkat Ullah
Vs
The State & another

Date of hearing: 11.10.2023.
Appellant (s) by: Mr. Shaiber Khan, Advocate

State by: Malik Haroon Iqbal, AAG

Complt: by: M/s. Naseer-ud-Din Shah, Advocate, alongwith
Said Nazir, Advocate, as Amicus Curiae.

JUDGMENT

SAHIBZADA_ ASADULLAH, J.- Through this single

judgment we intend to decide the instant criminal appeal as
well as the connected Cr.R No.184-P of 2021 titled “Ghani
Khan Vs Barkat Ullah & another” and Cr.A No.975-
P/2021, titled “Ghani Khan Vs Hazrat Ullah etc.”, as all
the cases are the outcome of one and same judgment
dated 30.10.2021, passed by learned Additional Sessions
Judge-XV, Peshawar delivered in case FIR No.1137 dated
16.10.2014 under sections 302/109/34 PPC, registered
with Police Station Chamkani, Peshawar, whereby the
appellant Barkat Ullah has been convicted and sentenced
under section 302 PPC to imprisonment for life alongwith
fine of Rs.2,00,000/- (two lac) as compensation to be paid
to the legal heirs of deceased within the meaning of
Section 544-A Cr.P.C, in default whereof the appellant shall
further undergo six months simple imprisonment. Benefit of

Section 382-B Cr.P.C has been extended to the appellant.
2. The crux of the instant case as per contents of FIR
is that complainant Ghani Khan reported the matter to the
police at the casualty of Lady Reading Hospital, Peshawar,
while present with the dead body of his deceased daughter
namely, Mst. Fozia, that her daughter was married to
Barkat Ullah s/o Hanif Ullah three years ago and strained
relationship was existed in between the husband and wife;
that her husband namely Barkat Ullah and his brother
namely Hazrat Ullah used to threaten his daughter, due to
which his daughter got annoyed and came to his house on
15,10.2014; that her husband namely Barkat Ullah came to
his house to take home back Mst. Fozia and they left his
house; that on the eventful day he was present in his house
when his son Sohail came to the house and disclosed him
that Barkat Ullah has killed Mst. Fozia on the instigation of
Hazrat Ullah with firearm; that on receiving information, he
immediately went to the house of his daughter, and found
her lying unconscious; that he hurriedly shifted his daughter
with the help of co-villagers to the hospital, where the
doctor pronounced her dead. Motive was disclosed
strained relations between the spouses. He charged the
accused for commission of the offence, hence, the FIR ibid.
3. After arrest of the accused and completion of
investigation, case was put in Court, where the appellant
was charge sheeted to which he pleaded not guilty and

claimed trial. In order to prove its claim, the prosecution
produced and examined as many as 10 witnesses. After
closure of the prosecution evidence statements of accused
were recorded under section 342 Cr.P.C, wherein they
professed innocence, however, neither they opted to be
examined on oath under section 340 (2) Cr.P.C, nor wished
to produce defence evidence. The learned trial Court, after
conclusion of the trial, found the appellant guilty of the
charge and while recording his conviction sentenced him
as stated above, and the co-accused was acquitted of the
charge hence this appeal and the connected Cr.A No.975-
P/2021. It is worth to mention that the complainant through
the connected criminal revision has asked the
enhancement of the awarded sentence.

4. The learned counsel for the parties were heard at
length and with their valuable assistance the record was
scanned through.

5. | The shocking death of the deceased was reported to
the local police, in the Causality Room of the Lady Reading
Hospital, Peshawar, by the complainant. The report of the
complainant was penned down in the shape of murasila
and thereafter the injury sheet and inquest report were
prepared. After doing the needful, the dead body of the
deceased was sent for postmortem examination. The
investigating officer after receiving copy of the FIR, visited
the spot and on his personal observation prepared the site

plan. During spot inspection the investigating officer took
blood stained piece from the bed sheet and he also
recovered an empty of .30 bore alongwith a live cartridge
from inside the room. During further search an empty of .30
bore was taken into possession from the Veranda of the
house. The accused soon after the occurrence went into
hiding and on their arrest, they faced the trial, which ended
in the conviction of the appellant and in the acquittal of the
co-accused.

6. True that the incident has shocked us to the core, but
that by itself must not influence the Courts of law while
determining the fate of the accused and holding him
responsible for the tragic incident. We understand that
most of the times matrimonial disputes end in tragedies
and so is the case before us. The learned Trial Court took
into consideration the evidence on file, statements of the
witnesses and thereafter reached to a definite conclusion
regarding the guilt of the one and innocence of the other,
but this Court is to see that whether the learned Trial Court
was justified in handing down the impugned judgment and
as to whether the learned Trial Court appreciated the
evidence on file. No doubt the deceased died an unnatural
death in the house of her husband, and that the husband
was supposed to explain the circumstances which led to
the death of the deceased, but under no circumstances, it
is the husband to prove himself innocent, rather this is for

the prosecution to prove him guilty. The burden never shifts
from the prosecution to the accused, rather the same shifts
only when an accused takes a specific plea, which is not
the case before us. The law never permits the willful
shifting of this burden as in that eventuality the scheme of
things would change abnormally, and the change brought
would fade away the purpose, as by then it would turn easy
to charge and hard to disprove. This factor time & again
came before the superior courts of the country, more
particularly, the Apex Court, and in different cases,
because of its different circumstances, the approach was
different, but no rule of thumb was laid down for absolving
the prosecution of its liability to prove. Few judgments were
cited before this Court, rendered by the Apex Court, but in
all these judgments never ever the liability was fixed
against the accused / husband, rather the approach of the
Apex Court was different from case to case and from
circumstances to circumstances. We derive wisdom from
the judgments of the Apex Court, and so the learned
counsel tried, for determining the issue in hand. Two
judgments were cited by both the sides to achieve two
different targets. The defence wanted us to apply the
principles laid down in “NAZIR AHMAD Versus The
STATE”, (2018 S C MR 787), whereas the prosecution
wanted strict application of the law laid down in “Saeed

Ahmad Vs the State”, (2015 SCMR 7710).
7. | We heard with patience the learned counsel for the
parties and are eager to determine that which of the two
would resolve the controversy and that which of the two
has answered the circumstances we are facing. In “NAZIR
AHMAD Versus The STATE”, (2018 S C MR 787), it was
held that the liability to prove will never shift the shoulders,
rather under all circumstances it is the prosecution to prove
and it is the prosecution to discharge its liability. The
judgment never indemnified the husband, rather he is
burdened with explaining convincingly the circumstances
which led to the tragic dead, but the same should not be
misconstrued by holding the husband responsible for the
tragedy. The terms “to explain” by no stretch of imagination
would mean to disprove, if it was interpreted as such, then
the sole character to occupy the stage would be the poor
husband and the role of the prosecution would be confined
to that of a silent spectator with its only contribution to
charge, which has never been permitted by the law and by
the jurisprudence. The controversy of shifting liabilities is
set to rest by the Apex Court in the above quoted judgment
and many others. Even in “NAZ/IR AHMAD Versus The
STATE” (supra), the Apex Court demands an explanation
from the husband to explain that what led to the tragic
death of his wife and that what were the circumstances
which ended in to the tragedy, but the liability of the

husband is a circumstance which can be taken _ into
consideration to understand the issue in hand, with a
limited scope and for a limited purpose, it has never been
hold as the determining factor, had this been the intention,
then the conclusion drawn would be other than the
concluded. We are confident in holding that it is the
prosecution to charge and it is the prosecution to prove.
The role of the prosecution has never been restricted
regardless of the fact that of what nature the cases are. To
our understanding if the accused is burdened to disprove
and the prosecution is permitted to charge then the scheme
of things would lead to a catastrophe and the damage
caused would be beyond repair.

8. Now diverting to “Saeed Ahmad Vs the State”, (2015
SCMR 710), it leaves no ambiguity in telling that in case of
an unnatural death the husband would explain the
circumstances which led to the unnatural death, provided
they remained in uninterrupted association till the death.
Holistically, it never shifted the burden to prove, from the
prosecution to the accused / husband, but burdened the
husband to tell the circumstances which led to the tragic
death. When both the judgments are read in juxtaposition,
we are confident in holding that the target was the same
and so the approach, but both speak of different
circumstances. What we gathered from the same is, that
under all circumstances the burden to prove lies on the

prosecution and it never shifts to the accused. Under all
circumstances the prosecution is under the bounded duty
to connect the accused with commission of the offence, but
in rare circumstances, the burden shifts, that only when an
accused takes a specific plea. The death of the deceased
has shocked us all and we are not reluctant to hold that she
was done to death, but who, is and was, a question which
the prosecution failed to answer. The learned Trial Court
entangled in the tragic atmosphere of the case while
handing down the impugned judgment. As this Court is
seized of the matter, so we deem it appropriate to re-visit
the entire evidence and to scan through the record of the
case, to ascertain as to whether the learned Trial Court
was justified while handing down the impugned judgment.
The record tells that apart from the circumstantial evidence,
an eyewitness also appeared and deposed that the
deceased lost her life in his immediate presence. The
learned Trial Court appreciated the eyewitness account
and the circumstantial evidence as well, which convinced
him regarding the participation of the appellant in the
incident. To resolve the controversy that how the deceased
lost her life and that who was the killer, this Court deems it
appropriate to reconsider the evidence on file and to re-
assess the role played by the appellant and the
circumstances of the case.

9. The points for determination before this Court are; as

to whether the incident occurred in the mode, manner and
at the stated time; as to whether the eyewitness was
present at the time of incident and at the time of report; as
to whether the medical evidence supports the case of the
prosecution and as to whether it was the appellant, who
killed the deceased at the instigation of co-accused. For
just determination of the instant matter, we deem it
essential to go through the statements of the witnesses and
to see its worth in light of the attending circumstances of
the present case. We have two witnesses before us, one
the complainant who is the father of the deceased and the
other the eyewitness, a real brother, so to appreciate the
inherent worth of their statements, we deem it essential to
read the same in juxtaposition with the medical evidence
and the circumstantial evidence, collected by the
investigating officer. It is the inter-se relationship between
the parties which put this Court on guard and we are
anxious to apply the test of accuracy, so that miscarriage of
justice could be avoided. The complainant was examined
as PW-4, who disclosed the inter-se relationship between
the spouses, and also disclosed that few days before the
incident the deceased had come to his house and that it
was on reassurance of the appellant that she accompanied
him. The witness further disclosed that the unfortunate
incident occurred in the presence of his son and that it was
PW-Sohail who soon after the incident, rushed to the house

and informed him regarding the incident. This witness
10

explained the relationship between the parties and he also
explained that it was the co-accused Hazrat Ullah who
instigated the appellant to kill and that it was he who
handed over a pistol to the appellant for the purpose. The
eyewitness was examined as PW-6, who supported the
report of the complainant and also narrated the events as it
occurred. The witness disclosed that on the day of incident,
he had visited the house of his sister; that there was
exchange of hot words between the spouses; the co-
accused instigated the appellant to kill and handed him
over a pistol; that the deceased was fired at, who after
receiving firearm injuries fell unconscious; he rushed to his
house, informed his father and thereafter, the deceased
then injured was shifted to the hospital in taxi. As the
eyewitness deposed that the incident occurred in his
immediate presence and as the complainant is not the
eyewitness of the incident, so we deem it essential to
consider the attending circumstances of the present case
and the statements of these witnesses as well. This is
admitted on record that the complainant is not the
eyewitness, rather he reported the matter in the manner as
was disclosed by the eyewitness. It is interesting to note
that the statement of the eyewitness was not recorded on
the day of the incident and even on his pointation the site
plan was not prepared. Had the eyewitness been present

at the time of incident and soon thereafter, he would have
11

reported the matter to the local police and he would have
verified the report of the complainant. But right from the
beginning till the end, this witness remained absent and
even he did not identify the dead body before the police at
the time of report and before the doctor at the time of
postmortem examination. True that the complainant
disclosed the cause of killing as the strained relationship
between the spouses, but no report or complaint was made
in that respect and even no witness was produced who
could tell regarding such relationship. When the record is
silent regarding the strained relationship between the
parties and when no report was made in that respect,
coupled with the fact that no independent witness ever
appeared in support of the claim of the complainant, so in
such eventuality this Court cannot presume that the
spouses had _ strained relationship. The complainant
disclosed that few days earlier the deceased came to his
house, and a day earlier to the incident, the appellant came
after her and that it was on his assurance that the
deceased accompanied him. As even in respect of this
episode no witness from the house, other than the
complainant, was produced, so this aspect of the case
loses its significance. The complainant disclosed that the
parties married three years back and that the relationship
between the two for most of the time remained strained, but

the complainant could not point out that in the initial days
12

the deceased had ever deserted the house of the appellant
or that she was ever maltreated. When the complainant
failed to convince on this particular aspect of the case, so
our anxiety regarding the involvement of the appellant in
the incident, has further increased and the same has put us
on guard to apply extra care and caution, while determining
the guilt of the appellant.

10. The investigating officer visited the spot and on his
personal observation prepared the site plan. It is interesting
to note that when PW-Sohail was the eyewitness of the
incident, then under all circumstances he would have
accompanied the investigating officer to the spot and would
have pointed out the respective places of the deceased
and the accused, but his absence from the house at the
time of spot proceedings has put a question mark over his
presence at the time of incident. We are anxious to know
as to whether PW-Sohail was present when the deceased
was done to death and as to whether it was he who
informed the complainant regarding her death. The
eyewitness when appeared before the Trial Court, he was
questioned regarding the material aspects of the case,
more particularly, the manner in which the deceased was
done to death and the manner in which the information was
conveyed to the complainant and the dead body was
shifted to the hospital. It is pertinent to mention that the

statement under section 161 Cr.P.C of this witness was
13

recorded on the next day of the incident and that his
presence in the hospital at the time of report and at the
time of postmortem examination is not established from the
record, so much is needed to verify the truthfulness of this
witness. The witness deviated from his earlier recorded
statement and also made dishonest improvements. It is
pertinent to mention that in his statement recorded u/s 161
Cr.P.C, the eyewitness did not mention the exchange of
harsh words between the spouses, whereas in his court
statement he made dishonest improvement and the
exchange of harsh words between the spouses was
introduced. When the eyewitness appeared before the Trial
Court, he disclosed that after receiving firearm injuries, the
deceased fell unconscious, he rushed to his house and
informed the complainant, but in his earlier statement he
did not mention the same. The witness in his 161 Cr.P.C
statement, explained that after the deceased was fired at
he informed his father telephonically. When the witness
realized his mistake, he attempted to rectify the same and
explained that his court statement regarding rushing to his
house and informing his father is correct and the telephonic
information to his father as mentioned in his statement u/s
161 Cr.P.C is incorrect. Even his statement before the
police is silent regarding the unconsciousness of the
deceased. The witness improved his court statement and

deposed that after the dead body was shifted, the doctor
14

pronounced her dead, but his police statement does not
contain the said explanation. When both these statements
are read in juxtaposition, we found glaring contradictions
between the two and the same has damaged the
prosecution case beyond repair. As stated earlier that his
absence from the hospital at the time of report and his
absence during spot proceedings, is a circumstance which
cannot be ignored and the same confirms that the incident
did not occur in his immediate presence. The conduct of
the eyewitness is not above board and even the attending
circumstances of the present case do not confirm his
stance. As admittedly the deceased was his real sister, had
he been present, he would have resisted, but he did not
and his this attitude raises an eyebrow regarding his
presence, as a silent spectator. This witness is further to
tell that what harsh words were exchanged between the
two and that what for the co-accused instigated the
appellant and handed him over a pistol. On one hand the
record is silent regarding the strained relationship between
the deceased and the co-accused and on the other no
positive evidence was produced to tell that during the days
of incident the co-accused was also living under the same
roof. The manner in which the eyewitness explained the
circumstances does not appeal to a prudent mind and the
dishonest improvements he made, in his court statement,

has tarnished the worth and credibility of this witness. The
15

circumstances do tell that the eyewitness was not present
and that he was introduced as an eyewitness at a belated
stage, to strengthen the case of the prosecution. Once the
eyewitness claimed his presence on the spot at the stated
time, then under all circumstances it is he to prove his
presence on the spot and it was he to convince that the
incident occurred in the stated manner. But once the
eyewitness failed to establish his presence, then in that
eventuality it is the prosecution to suffer, as it was the
prosecution which shouldered the burden, so in case of
failure the burden would never shift. The similar
circumstance came before the Apex Court in case titled
“NAZIR AHMAD Versus The STATE”, (2018 SC MR
787), which reads as follows: -

“We have attended to this aspect of the case with
care and have found that when every other piece of
evidence relied upon by the prosecution has been
found by us to be utterly unreliable then the
appellant could not be convicted for the alleged
murder simply on the basis of a supposition. The
principle enunciated in the above mentioned cases
of Saeed Ahmed v. The State (2015 SCMR 710) and
Arshad Mehmood v. The State (2005 SCMR 1524)
was explained further in the cases of Nasrullah alias
Nasro v. The State (2017 SCMR 724) and Asad
Khan v. The State (PLD 2017 SC 681) wherein it
had been clarified that the above mentioned shifting
of some part of the onus to the accused may not be
relevant in a case where the entire case of the
prosecution itself is not reliable and where the
prosecution fails to produce any _ believable
evidence. It is trite that in all such cases the initial
onus of proof always lies upon the prosecution and
if the prosecution fails to adduce reliable evidence
in support of its own case then the accused person
cannot be convicted merely on the basis of lack of
discharge of some part of the onus on him.”
16

11. Once the presence of the eyewitness is disbelieved,
then this Court is to see the probability of the presence of
the appellant at the stated time. As admittedly the appellant
was running a vegetable shop during the days of incident in
a vegetable market and the co-accused was serving in the
police department, so the presumption would be that the
appellant was present at the place of his business when
the unfortunate incident occurred and the co-accused at
the place of his service. As the incident occurred at 2:00
PM, so presumption is attached to his presence at the
place of his business and not to his presence in the house
at the time of incident. The responsibility of the appellant
would be greater, if the incident occurred in the odd hours
of the night or early in the morning, as in that eventuality
his constant uninterrupted association with the deceased
would have been a circumstance, for the appellant to
explain, but once the association was broken, then his
presence can be presumed at the place of his business,
and less is left for the appellant and more for the
eyewitness, to convince. The story received a major blow
when the eyewitness introduced the co-accused as the
instigator. The presence of both the accused at the stated
time does not appeal to the judicial mind of this Court, in
case the spouses were having strained relationship and in
case they exchanged hot words, in the immediate presence

of the eyewitness, then this Court cannot resist to presume
17

that the murder was not preplanned and when so, then the
presence of the co-accused would not convince. This is for
the eyewitness to tell that what prompted the co-accused to
instigate the appellant to kill the deceased, as the co-
accused had no axe to grind. As the witness failed to
explain the interest of the co-accused to instigate, so his
participation has rightly been disbelieved and even this
Court is not ready to accept the same. As in the instant
case, it was the co-accused who instigated the appellant to
kill and that it was he who handed over the pistol, and once
the prosecution story to his extent is disbelieved, then
benefits of the same must have been extended to the
appellant. The circumstances do tell that the incident did
not occur in the mode, and in the manner and that the
eyewitness was not present at the stated time. The
prosecution case is replete with doubts and benefit of the
same must be extended to the appellant. It was the
eyewitness who gave a twist to the prosecution story by
diverting it from its natural course, so it was he to explain
that why he did not resist the act of killing and that why he
did not intervene, to put the parties at ease, the conduct
displayed by the witness is not natural and his this conduct
has put at stake the veracity of his statement. Once the
witness failed to establish his presence on the spot and
once his testimony in respect of the co-accused was

disbelieved, then no conviction could be awarded on the
18

basis of evidence, once disbelieved. In this regard, wisdom
can also be derived from the judgment rendered in case
tiled “MUHAMMAD PERVAIZ Versus THE STATE and
other”, (PLD 2019 Supreme Court 592), wherein it was

held that: -

“A criminal case is to be essentially decided on the basis
of evidence adduced by the prosecution. Once the
witnesses had visited the deceased to take her back,
apparently there was no occasion for them to hold in
abeyance the purpose of their detour and in case they
were present and in the next room, there was no
compulsion for the appellant to do away with the
deceased at the risk of retaliation or a certain
prosecution........ Yet another circumstance to cast
away the conviction is rejection of prosecution evidence
qua Khalid co-accused. Role assigned to the acquitted
co-accused is inexorably intertwined with appellant's
alleged participation in the crime and thus even
strongest corroboration, otherwise hopelessly lacking
cannot rescue the charge.”

12. We are conscious of the fact that the deceased
received as many as three injuries on her body and the
seat of injuries do confirm that she did not commit suicide,
but that by alone would not be sufficient to hold the
appellant responsible for the killing, more particularly, when
the eyewitness failed to prove his presence on the spot.
The dead body was examined by the doctor, but no specific
opinion was given regarding the cause of death, as to
whether the death was homicidal or suicidal. The attending
circumstances of the present case do confirm that the
deceased died an unnatural death, but who killed, is still
shrouded in mystery. The introduction of the eyewitness is
another factor which cost the prosecution a lot, as it was he

who shouldered the burden, but failed to discharge. The
19

investigating officer though collected one empty of .30 bore
alongwith a live cartridge from inside the room and an
empty of .30 bore from the veranda of the house, but in
absence of a matching report the same has lost its worth
and cannot be taken into consideration.

13. Another piece of evidence was the weapon used for
the killing of the deceased, but the same could not be
recovered. Had the pistol been recovered, then the
prosecution had the chance, of sending the same with the
recovered empties to the Firearms Expert, but the collected
empties have lost its utility as no matching report could be
procured. In the given circumstances of the present case,
this Court is confident in holding that the prosecution failed
to connect the appellant with the murder of the deceased
and that the prosecution could not absolve itself from the
liability to prove. Once this Court comes to a definite
conclusion that it was the prosecution to prove the accused
guilty and once the prosecution failed, then the only choice
available to the court, is to extend the benefit of doubt.

14. The motive was alleged as the strained relationship
between the spouses, but in that respect the complainant
failed to produce any independent witness and even the
investigating officer could not record statements of
independent witnesses in that respect. True that strained
relationship between the spouses was disclosed to be the

cause of killing, but equally true that neither any complaint
20

was made to the police nor any Jirga was convened for the
purpose. When so, then this Court is confident in holding
that the prosecution failed to prove the alleged motive.
True that absence or weakness of motive would hardly be
a ground for acquittal, but when the motive was the only
cause of killing, then its failure would lead only & only to the
acquittal, and the present case is no exception.

15. There is not denial of the fact that soon after the
incident the appellant went into hiding and he failed to
explain, but mere abscondance would hardly be a ground
for holding the appellant responsible for the tragic death of
the deceased. As the prosecution failed to bring home guilt
against the appellant and as the eyewitness account failed
to convince the manner in which the incident occurred and
to establish its presence on the spot, so once the
prosecution witnesses are disbelieved and once the
credibility of the witnesses is shattered, then the
abscondance by itself would hardly be a circumstance to
ask for conviction. True that the appellant went into hiding,
but his abscondance by itself is insufficient to hold him
guilty, as different people reacts differently when such
tragic incident occurs, as is held by the Apex Court in case
titled “WAJAHAT Versus GUL DARAZ and another”
(2019 SCMR 1451), which reads as follows: -

“Appellant's belated plea of the suicide even if
rejected outrightly by itself would not absolve
the prosecution to drive home the charge, on its
own strength and same goes for appellant's
21

absconsion; people avoid to face process of law
or their adversaries for a variety of reasons, not
necessarily inclusive of their guilt; Appellant's
reticence to satisfactorily explain as to what
befell upon his better half under the same roof,
though somewhat intriguing, however cannot be
equated to qualify as evidentiary certainty,
essentially required in order to saddle him with
formidable corporal consequences; his failure
would not give rise to an adverse presumption
within the contemplation of Article 121 of the
Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984 and thus it
would be grievously unsafe to maintain the
conviction, without potential risk of error as
well as diametrical departure from adversarial
nature of criminal trial.”

16. The cumulative effect of what has been stated above,
leads this Court to an irresistible conclusion that the
prosecution failed to bring home guilt against the appellant
and the learned Trial Court fell into error while handing
down the impugned judgment. The impugned judgment
does not find support from the record of the case and
statements of the witnesses, the same calls for
interference. The instant criminal appeal is allowed, the
impugned judgment is set aside and the appellant is
acquitted of the charge. He shall be released forthwith if not
required to be detained in connection with any other
criminal case.

17. The complainant feeling dissatisfied asked for
enhancement of the sentence through the connected
Criminal Revision No.184-P/2021, but as the appeal
against conviction has succeeded, so the instant criminal
revision has lost its utility, hence, the same stands

dismissed.
22

18. The co-accused stood acquitted vide the impugned
judgment and the complainant approached this Court
through Criminal Appeal No.975-P/2021, but as the main
criminal appeal against conviction succeeded and the
appellant Barkat Ullah stood acquitted of the charge, so the
instant criminal appeal has lost its utility, hence, the same
stands dismissed.

19. Above are the detailed reasons for our short order of
even date.

Announced
11.10.2023

*Hafeez Burki, PS*

SENIOR PUISNE JUDGE

JUDGE

(DB) Mr. Justice Ishtiag Ibrahim & Mr. Justice Sahibzada Asadullah
