JUDGMENT SHEET
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, PESHAWAR

(Judicial Department)
Cr.A No. 483-P of 2015

Imaran Ali
Vs
The State

JUDGMENT
Date of hearing 19.11.2015

Appellant by Mr. Amjid Noor, Advocate

Respondent by Syed Sikandar Hayat Shah, AAG

MUHAMMAD YOUNIS THAHEEM, J.- Through the

instant appeal u/s 48 CNS Act 1997 r/w Section 32, 33, 74
CNS Act 1997 u/s 516-A Cr.PC, appellant Imran Ali has
questioned the impugned order dated 08.08.2015 of learned
Additional Sessions Judge/Judge Special Court-V, Peshawar
whereby application for ‘superdari’ of the vehicle in question
was refused to him which was seized by the local police in a
case registered vide FIR No. 589 dated 13.07.2015 u/s 9 (c)

CNS Act at Police Station Badaber, Peshawar.

2. Brief facts of the case as per contents of FIR are that

local police of Police Station Badaber while on usual ‘gasht’
-2-

received information that contraband narcotics are going to be

smuggled from Dara Adam Khel to Punjab so in consequence

thereof police party there and then picketed near Flour Mill on

“Afridi road” for the purpose of checking in the meanwhile a

motorcar bearing No.[DD8131/Islamabad white colour Suzuki

Khyber was stopped. On query the driver disclosed his name

as Farhat Ali son of Ayub Khan and on further search of

motorcar ASI found beneath the driver seat two packets of

‘charas pukhta’ which were recovered and on weighment

found two Kgs. The contraband “charas” alongwith motorcar

was taken into possession by the local police on the spot and

‘murasila’ was sent through constable Zahir No. 1339 for the

registration of case against the accused and so case was

registered as mentioned above.

3. The appellant filed an application before the learned

Court of Additional Sessions Judge-V, Peshawar for the

custody/superdari of the aforesaid vehicle which was refused

by the learned Court below vide impugned order dated

08.08.2015. Feeling aggrieved from the impugned order
-3-
appellant has filed instant appeal for the custody of the vehicle

on ‘superdari’, hence this appeal.

4. Learned counsel for the appellant contended that there

is no evidence on record to show that the vehicle has been

used for the commission of alleged offence with the consent of

the appellant or appellant was in any knowledge of the

contraband “charas” kept in the car by the driver/accused. He

further added that the appellant is bonafide owner of the

vehicle in question which was given for plying as taxi to the

accused on rent/fair and there is no rival claimant of the same,

hence is entitled for its possession and the learned Court blow

did not consider this legal aspect of the case and had refused

application vide impugned order; that if the vehicle in question

is lying in open air in the police station and if is not returned

to the appellant then it will be deteriorated and prayed that the

same may be returned on ‘superdari’ till the final disposal of

the case and will produce as and when required by the learned

trial Court during recording of evidence.
-4-

5. Conversely, the learned AAG contended that the local

police had found the vehicle in question which was used for

the purpose of trafficking of narcotics. He argued that as per

the contents of ‘murasila’ and FIR the alleged contraband

“charas” was kept under the driver seat and the vehicle is a

corroborating piece of evidence and production of same

during evidence is necessary for the prosecution to prove its

case and if returned on ‘superdari’ important piece of

evidence could be damaged and supported the judgment/order

of learned Court below as well reasoned in accordance with

law and prayed for dismissal of appeal.

6. Valuable arguments of learned counsel for the

parties heard and record gone through.

7. Perusal of the case file reveals that the vehicle in

question was used for the purpose of trafficking contraband

narcotics substance without the consent of the appellant and

this fact was not in the knowledge of the appellant while the

vehicle in question was given to the accused/driver for plying

it as taxi on fair/rent by the owner/appellant. In this respect the
-5-

material collected by the I.O did not show any slightest kind

of suspicion brought on record that appellant was in

knowledge that vehicle is used for the commission of alleged

offence neither on this aspect case was investigated. In this

regard reliance is placed on the case titled as ASkari Leasing

Ltd. Through Manager Vs the State cited as 2007 P Cr L J

755 (Lahore). The relevant part of judgment is reproduced

below:

“As to whether any suspicion has been

expressed that the petitioner had

knowledge that the vehicle is to be used

for the commission of said offence or that

any investigation had been conducted on

the same lines and further any evidence

has been collected.”

In the same cited judgment view has been derived from the

verdict of Honourable Supreme Court in case titled as Abdul

Salam V. The State (2003 SCMR 246) is reproduced below:
-6-

“In this view of the matter, following the

same dictum (2003 SCMR_ 246) of

Honourable Supreme Court upon reading

of Section 32 and 74 of CNS Act 1997, we

do find that the petitioner who _ is

admittedly the owner of the vehicle is

entitled to its release. Criminal Revision is

accordingly allowed. The impugned order

of learned Additional Sessions Judge,

Attock, is set aside and the vehicle is

ordered to be released to the petitioner on

superdari subject to furnishing of a

bond......”

(cited judgment in braces “2003 SCMR 246” is ours for emphasis)

8. In the instant case the documents annexed with

the petition shows that the appellant is owner of the said

vehicle and there is no rival claimant of the vehicle in question

and there is no any suspicion available on record brought by

the I.O that the appellant was in knowledge of alleged crime.
-7-
Appellant will produce the same at the time of recording of

evidence before the trial Court as when ordered.

9. Thus, we allow this appeal and set aside the

impugned judgment and order of the learned appellate Court

and the vehicle in question is returned to the appellant on

‘superdari’ subject to the satisfaction by showing original

lawful ownership documents of the said vehicle to the SHO

upon furnishing a bond in a sum of Rs.500000/- (five lacs) to

the satisfaction of the said SHO/Investigation Officer and

further will furnish an undertaking that appellant shall produce

vehicle in the trial Court as and when ordered.

Announced.

19.11.2015

JUDGE

JUDGE

*Ihsan*
