Judgment Sheet

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
PESHAWAR.

JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT

Cr.A No.559-P of 2013.

JUDGMENT

Date of hearing............25.10.2017......... 0.0. ce cece es

Appellant: (Imran Khan) By Mr. Jalaluddin, Advocate......

Respondent/State: By Mr. Moen-ud-Din Humayun, AAG.
eek ake

QALANDAR ALI KHAN, J:- The instant

appeal under section 48 CNSA by Imran
Khan, appellant, is directed against the
judgment/order dated 23.10.2013 of the
learned Additional Sessions Judge-XIV/Judge,
Special Court, Peshawar, whereby, the
accused/appellant was _ convicted under
section 9 (c) CNSA, 1997 and sentenced to

rigorous imprisonment for life; and also to fine
of Rs:100000/- or in default of payment of fine
to further six months simple imprisonment,
while extending him the benefit of section 382-
B Cr.P.C. Simultaneously, the learned trial
Court/Additional Sessions Judge-XlV/Judge,
Special Court, Peshawar declared absconding
co-accused Asim as proclaimed offender and
directed for issuance of perpetual warrant of

arrest against him.

2. The case/FIR was registered on the
murasila of Fazal Wahid Khan SHO Police
Station Sarband, Peshawar (complainant),
who, allegedly received spy information while
on patrol duty along with other police officials,
about smuggling of chars in Cultus motorcar
No.LZO-1125 from Bara tribal territory, and
started vigil, and noticed the said car coming
from the tribal territory, wherefrom a person
occupying the rear seat managed to get down
and flee towards tribal territory, while in the
motorcar, the accused/appellant was found on
the driving seat and during his interrogation

and on his pointation from a cavity between
the rear seat and CNG tank, 25 packets of
chars Pukhta were recovered, each packet
weighing 1/1 kilogram, total 25 kilograms. The
seizing officer/complainant separated 5/5
grams samples from each of the recovered
packets and sealed them into separate
parcels No.1 to 25, while the remaining chars
was sealed separately in parcel No.26. The
motorcar was taken into possession, and the
accused/appellant was arrested, who also
disclosed name of the person making good
his escape from the motorcar as Asim.

3. The investigation was entrusted to
Bashir Khan S.I investigation (PW-7), who
proceeded to the spot, and prepared the site
plan, and also received positive result from
the FSL; and, then, after completion of
investigation, complete challan in the case
was submitted by the local police to the
learned trial Court/Additional Sessions Judge-
X|V/Judge, Special Court, Peshawar.

4. The learned trial Court framed formal

charge under section 9 (c) CNSA against the
accused/appellant, to which he pleaded not
guilty and claimed trial. The prosecution, in
support of its case produced a total of nine
PWs, including, Abdul Wahid No.4834 (PW-
1); Fazal Wahid Khan DSP, Peshawar (PW-
2); Rehmat Khan Inspector (PW-3); Behram
Khan Inspector (PW-4); Taj Malook Inspector
(PW-5); Pervaiz Khan Constable 3706 (PW-
6); Bashir Khan S.| (PW-7); Younas Khan HC
No.3820 (PW-8); and Nisar Khan SI (PW-9).
Thereafter the prosecution closed its evidence
and statement of the accused was recorded
under section 342 Cr.P.C. The
accused/appellant denied allegations of the
prosecution levelled against him, and also
expressed his desire to produce defence
evidence; but lateron recorded statement to
the effect that the defence witnesses, who
could depose about his hiring the taxi car of
the absconding co-accused for offering
Fateha, had been dislodged from their abodes

due to military operation in Bara; and his
counsel also recorded statement about not
producing the defence evidence.

5. Having heard learned SPP for the
State and learned counsel for the
accused/appellant, the learned trial
Court/Additional Sessions Judge-XlV/Judge,
Special Court, Peshawar, rendered the
impugned judgment/order dated 23.10.2013,
and the accused/appellant was convicted
under section 9 (c) CNSA, 1997 and
sentenced to rigorous imprisonment for life;
and also to fine of Rs:100000/- or in default of
payment of fine to further six months simple
imprisonment; hence the instant appeal by the
appellant against the impugned
judgment/order of the learned _ trial
court/Additional Sessions Judge-XlV/Judge,
Special Court, Peshawar.

6. Arguments of learned counsel for the
accused/appellant and learned AAG heard
and record perused.

7. The two aspects of the case, namely,

presence of the accused/appellant on the
wheels at the time of recovery of the narcotics
from the motorcar; and conviction and
sentences of imprisonment for life and fine of
Rs: 100000/- awarded to the
accused/appellant by the learned _ trial
Court/Additional Sessions Judge-XlV/Judge,
Special Court, Peshawar, vide impugned
judgment dated 23.10.2013 need deliberation.
8. As regards’ presence of _ the
accused/appellant in motorcar No.LZO-1125
at the time of recovery of chars Pukhta in 25
packets, suffice it to say that notwithstanding
non recovery of CNIC of the
accused/appellant, registration book of the
vehicle, driving license, cash amount, mobile
phone or any other document or article from
the possession of the accused/appellant to
prove his presence in the vehicle and the
other person present with him in the vehicle
and making good his escape in mysterious
circumstances, besides plea of defence of the
accused/appellant regarding his hiring the taxi

car for offering Fateha, the admission by the
accused/appellant about his presence in the
vehicle at the time of recovery of narcotics
from the motorcar and his arrest by the police
from the vehicle wherefrom the narcotics were
recovered would lead to a presumption of
commission of the offence under section 29
CNSA, 1997, unless and until the contrary
was proved by the accused/appellant. It may
be pointed out here that in his statement
under section 342 Cr.P.C, the
accused/appellant expressed his desire to
produce defence evidence, but lateron he
expressed his inability to do so for the reason
that his relatives had shifted their abode from
Bara due to military operation. In other words,
the accused/appellant failed to prove his plea
of defence that he had hired the taxi car of the
absconding co-accused in order to offer
Fateha in Peshawar city.

9. The presence of the appellant/accused
in the vehicle at the time of recovery of the
narcotics having been proved on record, the

next question falling for determination would
be justification for award of sentence of
imprisonment for life and fine of Rs:100000/-,
awarded to the appellant/accused vide the
impugned judgment dated 23.10.2013, in view
of quantity of the contraband/chars recovered
from the motorcar. The FIR showed recovery
of 25 packets, each packet containing 1/1 Kg
chars Pukhta, total 25 Kilograms chars
Pukhta, from a space between the rear seat
and CNG tank of the motorcar. The FIR
further showed samples weighing 5/5 grams
separated from each of the 25 packets for
chemical analysis in the FSL; and, therefore,
the chemical examiner furnished opinion with
regard to 25 samples each weighing 5 grams,
in the affirmative, showing the same to be that
of chars. The learned trial Court/Additional
Sessions Judge-XIV/ Judge, Special Court,
Peshawar, vide impugned judgment dated
23.10.2013, found the accused/appellant
guilty of commission of offence under section
9 (c) CNSA 1997, for having in his possession

25 Kilograms chars Pukhta in 25 packets,
exceeding the prescribed limit of 10 Kilograms
in section 9 (c) CNSA; and, thus, making the
accused/appellant liable to punishment not
less than imprisonment for life.

10. However, the fact that all the 25
packets of chars were containing 13 slabs,
fixed to each other, as observed by the
learned trial Court after de-sealing the packets
on the request of learned counsel for the
accused/appellant; and evidence of the
prosecution, showing samples separated from
each packet and not from each slab in the
packet, and thus 25 samples from 25 packets,
and not 325 samples from all the slabs in the
packets, would reduce quantity of the
narcotics from 25 Kilograms to 125 grams or
at the most to 77 grams in one slab out of 13
slabs in a packet of one Kilograms, total 1925
grams, making the accused/appellant liable to
lesser punishment of imprisonment

11. Consequently, while maintaining
conviction of the appellant/accused under

section 9 CNSA, the punishment of
imprisonment for life is reduced to the one
already undergone, as the appellant/accused
is behind the bars since his arrest on
19.12.2011. Likewise, the amount of fine is
reduced from Rs:100000/- to Rs:20000/- and
in default of payment of fine to one month
simple imprisonment. The appeal is disposed

of, accordingly.

Announced.
25.10.2017.
JUDGE
JUDGE
*M.Igbal*

(D.B) —Hon’ble Mr. Justice Lal Jan Khattak.
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Qalandar Ali Khan.
