JUDGMENT SHEET

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
BANNU BENCH.

(Judicial Department)

Cr.A No.51-B of 2015.
Abdul Rehman

Vs
The State & sahar Gul

JUDGMENT

Date of hearing 11.04.2017

Appellant-Petitioner: By Syed Fakhrud Din Shah Advocate
& Khosh Ameer Advocate.

Respondent: State By Shahid Hameed Qureshi, Addl. AG

& Others By Anwar Khan Maidad Khel,
Advocate.

ISHTIAQ IBRAHIM, J.--- This Criminal Appeal No.51-

B/2015, has been filed by convict/ appellant Abdur Rehman

and the connected Criminal Appeal No.54-B/2015 filed by

convict/ appellant Ragibullah and Criminal Revision No.01-

B/2016 has been preferred by Mst. Tapala widow of deceased

Nasim Gul, for enhancement of sentence of appellants Abdur

Rehman and Ragibullah, arise from the judgment of learned

Additional Sessions Judge-II], Bannu dated 16.04.2015,

whereby both the appellants Abdur Rehman and Raqibullah,
convicted under section 302(b) P.P.C and sentenced to

imprisonment for life, with compensation amounting to

Rs.200000/- (two lac) each to the LRs of deceased under

section 544-A Cr.PC and in default thereof to further undergo

for six months SI. Convicted under section 382 P.P.C and

sentenced to undergo for five (5) years imprisonment. Both

the sentences shall run concurrently. Benefit of section 382-

Cr.PC was extended in favour of both convicts/appellants.

2. Since both appeals and criminal revision are the
outcome of one and the same occurrence/ F.I.R, therefore,

these are being disposed of by way of this single judgment.

3. Sahar Gul, the complainant on 03.02.2014 at

19.30 hours, in emergency room of Civil Hospital, Bannu

reported the matter to the local police that his brother Nasim

Gul left his house for the purpose of business of motorcycle

and property dealing, at 05.30 P.M he received information

through mobile cell that dead body of his brother Naseem

Gul was lying in Darga known as Adhami Nala in the limits

of Dogar Umerzai, who was done to death by firing at him.
He proceeded to the spot and found his brother dead. he

lodged the report against unknown accused.

4. Rustam Khan ASI (PW2) recorded report of

complainant in shape of murasila (Ex:PA), readout contents

of murasila to him, who after admitting the same correct

signed the same as a token of its correctness. he prepared

injury sheet Ex:PW 2/1, inquest report Ex:PW 2/2, of the

deceased Naseem Gul and sent the deadbody to the doctor for

Post Mortem examination under the escort of FC Badshah

Hussain No.190 (PW-1), while the Murasila was sent to the

Police Station through FC Shabib Rehman No.1800. Mr.

Qaza Khan ASI (PW-4) culminated the contents of Murasila

in shape of F.IL.R No.23 (Ex:PW 4/1), copy of which was

handed over to Muzamil Khan SI (PW-6), who in receipt of

copy of F.I.R proceeded to the spot, prepared site plan

Ex:PB on the pointation of complainant Sahar Gul, took into

possession blood stained earth from the place of deceased,

two empties of 7.62 bore and prepared recovery memo

Ex:PW 6/1. He took into possession blood stained belongings

of deceased vide recovery memo Ex:PW 6/2. He took into
possession one mobile cell from accused Ragqibullah vide

recovery memo Ex:PW3/1, admitting to be the property of

deceased. A Kalashnikov No.1964CE0335 recovered from

accused Ragqibullah and for the same separate F.I.R No.33

dated 18.020.2014 under section 13 A.O was registered.

Convict /appellant Raqibullah was arrested on 18.02.2014, he

made confessional statement before the learned Judicial

Magistrate on 21.02.2014. Convict/ appellant Abdur Rehman

was charged by the appellant Raqibullah in his confessional

statement, who was arrested on 21.02.2014 by Qaza Khan

ASI.The IO recorded statements of PWs as well as accused

under section 161 Cr.PC, placed on file other case F.I-Rs

showing involvement of accused/ appellants, placed on file

F.S.L (Ex:PW 6/9) report in respect of serologist and F.S.L

(EX:PW 6/10) arm expert report. F.S.L report with respect

of empties and recovered Kalashnikov Ex:PW 6/11 was

placed on file by the I.O and after completion of investigation

case file was handed over to the S.H.0 Mohammad Riaz

(PW-9), who submitted complete challan (ExPW 9/1)

against the accused.
5. The prosecution in order to prove guilt of

accused/ appellants, produced and examined as many as

eleven PWs. On conclusion of trial, the statement of accused

was recorded under section 342 Cr.PC, wherein they

professed innocence, however, they neither wished to

produce defence evidence nor opted to be examined on oath

as provided under section 342 (2) Cr.PC. Learned trial court

after hearing arguments of both sides, vide impugned

judgment dated 16.04.2015 convicted the accused/

appellants. Both the accused/ appellants have preferred their

separate appeals, while the complainant filed criminal

revision petition. Both the appeals and criminal revision are

going to be decided through this single judgment.

6. Arguments heard and record perused.

7. Record divulges that admittedly, the deadbody

of deceased Nasim Gul was found lying abandoned in Darga

Known as Adhami Nala in the limits of Dogar Umerzai. The

complainant, who happened to be the brother of deceased

rushed to the spot after receiving information on cell phone.
Admittedly, no motive was alleged in the first information

report nor any person was charged for the offence. The

occurrence has taken place at unknown time, while his

deadbody was found and then report was lodged at

emergency room of Civil Hospital, Bannu on 03.02.2014 at

19.30 hours. The complainant thereafter recorded

supplimentary statement, wherein he charged the accused/

appellant Raqibullah, who after arrest recorded confessional

statement, wherein given effective role of firing to accused/

appellant Abdur Rehman, due to which he was also

implicated in the instant case. In such eventuality, it would be

seen in light of the evidence and available record that on

which source of information the complainant charged the

accused/ appellant Raqibullah the evidentiary worth of his

confessional statement coupled with its corroboration with

recoveries, F.S.L reports and other circumstantial evidence.

8. The complainant Sahar Gul examined as

PW-10, he in examination in chief stated that:

“The accused Party conveyed us that

the accused  Ragibullah has
committed the offence and thereafter,

I charged him for the commission of

offence.”

It is very much astonishing that the accused

party himself conveyed the massage that they have

committed the murder of deceased, which fact is not

appealable to prudent mind, as no person want to borrow

trouble for himself.

9. The most important evidence in the case against

the accused/ respondents is confessional statement of

accused/ appellant Raqibullah, recorded by Adam Khan

Suleman Khel learned Judicial Magistrate, Bannu, on

21.02.2014. Learned judicial Magistrate appeared before the

Court as PW-11, in his cross-examination he admitted that

the accused was arrested in case F.I.R No. 33 on 18.02.2014

under section 13 A.O and remained in police custody till

recording his confessional statement on 21.02.2014, such

delay has not been explained, which makes the confessional

statement involuntary and unsafe to be made basis for

conviction. The accused/ appellant Raqibullah remained in
police custody after his arrest till recording confessional

statement, therefore, the principle that longer the police

custody of an accused, lesser the evidentiary value of his

confession apply in this case. Answer to a question No.3, in

questionnaire shows that accused remained in custody for

five days, while record shows otherwise, how the prosecution

would meet this anomaly in order to prove that confession

was voluntary, rather it can be safely assumed that accused

was kept in wrongful confinement, his date of arrest was

shown different to the actual one.

10. Adam Khan Suleman Khel, , the learned Judicial

Magistrate (PW-11) in his cross examination stated that “I

have not asked about the educational qualification of the

accused at the time of recording confessional statement, 5

to 10 minutes were given to the accused for thinking over

his confessional statement.” while the learned Judicial

Magistrate was supposed to have given at least 30 minutes

for thinking over his confessional statement. five to ten

minutes time given for thinking over his confessional

statement after remaining 5/6 days in custody is very short,
rendered the concessional statement not voluntarily. Section

13 (a) Chapter 13, Volume-III of Rule and Orders of the High

Court of Judicature at Lahore, read as under:

“(a) Accused should be left for some time
away from influence of Police.--- In
order to ensure that a statement or
confession under section 164 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure’ is made
voluntarily, the following precautions
Should be taken. Before the Magistrate
proceeds to record the confession, he
should arrange. so far as is compatible
with his safety and that of his staff and
with the safe custody of the prisoner. that
the latter is left for some time (say, for
half an hour) out of the hearing of police
officers or other persons likely to

influence him.

11. The confessional statement should be

clear and its contents appeal to reasons and if the same is

corroborated by other facts and circumstances of the case,

then it may be relied upon, but in the instant case, the very

story of confession is against the human _ conduct,

unbelievable and seems to be a cock and bull story.
-10-

12. There is no corroboration with other ocular or

circumstantial account, except two crime empties of 7.62

bore recovered from the spot on 03.02.2014 and recovery of

Kalashnikov on 18.02.2014, both were sent to the F.S.L and

received their on 28.02.2014, without any explanation that

where the same remain during the interregnum. In such

circumstances, this report cannot be relied upon, as

concoction and fabrication of the same cannot be ruled out.

Moreover, the appellant Raqibullah in his statement recorded

under section 342 Cr.PC, answer to question No. 6, has

denied the recovery of Kalashnikov. Even the prosecution

case as per connected F.I.R No. 33 under section 13 A.O is

that the same was recovered from his residential kotha of

accused/appellant Raqibullah the same Kalashnikov was

recovered. There is nothing on record that the same

kotha/room was ownership or in possession of the accused/

appellant Ragibullah, while admittedly in the house from

where alleged Kalashnikov was recovered, other inmates also

reside therein. The prosecution has failed to connect the
-l1ll-

alleged recovered Kalashnikov with the accused/appellant

Raqibullah beyond any reasonable doubt.

13. While the evidence available against the co-

appellant Abdur Rehman is the confessional statement of co-

accused, if one goes to the confessional statement of

appellant Raqibullah, it transpires that effective role of firing

at the deceased has been attributed to co-accused Abdur

Rehman, such confession of co-accused but not implicating

himself rather pleading innocence is not covered by Article

43 nor “evidence” as defined in Article 2 of the Qanun-e-

Shahadat Order. Confession made by co-accused cannot be

used as a substantive piece of evidence to make it a basis of

conviction of other accused but it can be used as a

corroborated piece of evidence, if corroborated by

independent evidence, while in the instant case, except

confessional statement of co-accused there is no evidence

available in the entire record. Hence, such confession of co-

accused is no evidence against another accused, more or

when retracted and uncorroborated. Reliance is placed on
-12-

case titled “State Vs Asfandyar Wali_and 2 others (1982

SCMR 321

". Clearly, therefore, the confession of a

co-accused is not evidence against another
accused, the more so, when it is retracted.
And, as pointed out by Sir John Beaumount in
Bhuboni Sahu v. The King (PLD1949PC90), a
confession of a co-accused :-.

"Does not indeed come within the definition
of evidence contained in section 3. It is not
required to be given on oath, nor in the
presence of the accused, and it cannot be
tested by cross-examination. It is a much
weaker type of evidence than the evidence of
an approver which is not subject to any of
these infirmities. Section 30, however,
provides that the Court may take the
confession into consideration and thereby, no
doubt, makes it evidence on which the Court
may act; but the section does not say that the
confession is to amount to proof. Clearly,
there must be other evidence. The confession
is only one element in the consideration of all
the facts proved in the case; it can be put into
the scale and weighed with the other evidence.
The confession of a co-accused can be used
only in support of other evidence and cannot
be made the foundation of a conviction."
These observations were approved by this

Court in Zulfikar Ali Bhutto v.The State
-13-

(PLD1979SC53), and therefore, Nisar Khan's
retracted confession might have been of some
assistance to the prosecution, if there had been
other evidence’ against Asfandyar_ to
corroborate his retracted confession. But, as
there is no such evidence, Nisar Khan's
confession cannot furnish this crucial link in
the case against Asfandyar, and, it is,
therefore, of no assistance to the prosecution

case against him.”

14. It is settled law that for giving the benefit of

doubt it is not necessary that there should be many

circumstances creating doubts. Single circumstance creating

reasonable doubt in a prudent mind about the guilt of accused

makes him entitled to its benefit, not as a matter of grace and

concession but as a matter of right. Reference is made to case

"Muhammad Akram vy. State" (2009 SCMR 230). All

these serious issues created doubts in our mind regarding the

guilt of the accused/appellants and these material facts

favouring the accused/appellants were not considered by the

learned trial Court, while appraising the evidence of the

prosecution. The occurrence is unwitnessed; complainant has

not charged an accused culprit in his first information report;

no motive is available; so called confession is neither
-14-

inculpatory nor believable or corroborated by ocular or

circumstantial account, in such eventuality, the learned trial

court has erred in law by not extending benefit of doubt in

favour of accused/ appellants,

15. In view of what has been discussed above, this

criminal Appeal No.51-B/2015 filed by accused/ appellants

Abdur Rehman and Cr. A No. 54-B/2015 filed by appellant

Raqibullah, are accepted, conviction and sentence recorded

by the learned trial court vide judgment dated 16.04.2015 is

set aside and the appellants are ordered to be acquitted of the

charges in case FIR No.23 dated 03.02.2014, under sections

302/382/34 P.P.C., at Police Station, Town Ship, Bannu.

They shall be released forthwith if not required in any other

case. While connected Cr. R No.01-B/2016 filed by Mst.

Tapala, widow of the deceased stands dismissed.

16. Above are the reasons of our short order of the

even date.

Announced.
11.04.2017

*Azam/P.S*

JUDGE
-15-

JUDGE
