Judgment Sheet

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, ABBOTTABAD
BENCH.

JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT

Cr. Appeal No. 365-A/2019.

JUDGMENT
Date of Hearing 05.10.2022
Appellant (Muhammad Tahir) by Mr. Magqbool Hussain Advocate.
Respondent (State) by Sardar Ali Raza, AAG.

Sardar Ali Raza and Fazal-e-Haq
Abbassi, Advocates,

FAZAL SUBHAN, J:- This single judgment shall dispose of
this Criminal Appeal filed against the judgment of conviction
passed against the appellant/convict and connected Criminal
Revision No.55-A/2019 filed by the complainant for
enhancement of sentence, awarded to the appellant/convict, as
common question of law and facts are involved therein.

2. Appellant Muhammad Tahir son of Gul Rehman has
filed instant appeal against the judgment and order passed by
the learned Additional Sessions Judge-I, Haripur, dated
07.10.2019 in case FIR No. 176 dated 17.05.2010 under
Sections 302/109 PPC of Police Station KTS Haripur, whereby
the appellant was convicted and sentenced to life imprisonment

and Rs. 200,000/- as fine to be paid to each legal heir of
-2-

deceased as compensation and in default of payment of fine, to
undergo simple imprisonment for six months while benefit of
section 382-B Cr.P.C was extended to him.

3. Brief facts narrated in the FIR Ex.PA are that
complainant Azam Khan after receiving information that his
maternal uncle, wife and children have been killed, he
alongwith his other relatives reached the house of maternal
uncle and found the dead bodies of deceased Doran Khan, Mst.
Imtiaz Bibi, Sajid, Saqib and Mst. Shaheen were lying. A small
boy Ismail son of Tahir was found present in the house who
disclosed that at night time his father Tahir came and killed all
the family members with firing. Motive for the occurrence was
disclosed to be that Mairaj Bibi daughter of Doran Khan had
taken divorce from Tahir and as a result he developed aversion
and dislike towards his in-laws and on the night of occurrence
he entered into their house and caused their death through
firing. On the report of complainant Azam Khan, case was
registered against the appellant/convict.

4. Upon completion of investigation, challan against the
appellant/convict was submitted for trial and the learned trial
Court, after observing legal formalities under section 265-C
Cr.P.C framed formal charge against him, to which he pleaded
not guilty and claimed trial, and in order to bring home the

charge against the accused, prosecution produced and examined
-3-

14 witnesses and closed its evidence, where after statement of
the appellant/convict was recorded under Section 342 Cr.P.C.
wherein he denied the charge and pleaded his innocence. He,
however, neither wished to produce defense evidence nor opted
to be examined on oath. The learned trial Court heard
arguments and vide impugned judgment and order dated
07.10.2019, convicted him to the above sentence, hence, he has
filed instant appeal.

5. We have thoroughly considered the submission of both
the learned counsels and AAG for State and have carefully gone
through all the material available on record.

6. This unfortunate and gruesome incident has taken place
in the night between 16" and 17" of May 2010, in the house of
deceased Doran Khan, Situated at Mohallah Turbaila, Sector 2
Kalabat Township (KTS), at a distance of | KM from PS KTS.
The incident was reported by one Azam Khan son of Baldar
Khan, resident of Sector 4 KTS at 11:00 hours, at DHQ
Hospital Haripur, wherein he at the very outset disclosed that
after getting knowledge of the occurrence, he alongwith other
relatives visited the house of his maternal uncle and found the
dead bodies of all the deceased and one child Ismail aged about
5 years, who happened to be the son of applicant/convict, was
present, who upon asking disclosed that his father came in the

night and murdered all the deceased through firing. From the
-4-

record it is clear that Azam Khan complainant did not live
longer and died before recording his statement in the trial of
accused, and therefore, several questioned remained
unanswered, like who conveyed him the information of the
occurrence, and which of the relatives come alongwith him to
the spot, however, it is clear from the murasila and FIR that, he
being closely related to the deceased and living few sector away
had come to the house of maternal uncle and as no other close
family member was present therefore after shifting the dead
bodies to the hospital he lodged the report. Throughout the
statements, of PW-3 Mst.Mehraj Bibi and PW-4 Imran Khan, it
was brought on record that Azam Khan was aware of the
internal affairs of the family of his maternal uncle and this
could be the reason that he described the facts and
circumstances of the murders. Anyhow, admittedly Azam
Khan arrived to the crime home after getting information and
has only made a report to the police. Section 154 Cr.P.C does
not lay any restriction that an information of commission of a
cognizable offence is to be conveyed by a person directly
effected of such crime, and therefore every person, even an
unrelated person or a stronger can even lodge a report to the
police, however, three conditions must be complied before
lodging the report, i.e the information must be relating to the

commission of cognizable offence, that such information shall
-5-

be reduced into writing and the same shall be signed by the
person giving such information. It is also well recognized rule
that, basic purpose of lodging of an FIR is to set the law into
motion for collection of evidence. Undeniably, Azam Khan
(now dead) complainant has only conveyed the information of
cognizable offence hence, absence of his statement would not
dilute the gravity of the offence reported by him.

7. Ismail Khan, a 12 years old boy, was examined as PW-2.
As per record he was 5 years of age at the time of occurrence
and Azam Khan complainant, while lodging the report at DHQ
Haripur, reported that when he reached to the crime house, all
the deceaseds were lying dead except Ismail, who was present
alive, and on inquiry, he disclosed the occurrence. The said PW
is the real son of appellant/convict and it is proved from the
record throughout that after developing aversion with her
husband, Mst. Meraj Bibi (PW-3) was living separate from him.
Deceased was maternal grandfather of PW Ismail and he used
to live with him and therefore presence of Ismail on the night of
occurrence in the crime house was natural and it cannot be said
that he is a planted witness. It is brought on record that at the
time of separation of appellant/convict and Mst. Meraj Bibi,
PW Ismail was about 2-1/2 years.

8. As stated above, at the time of occurrence PW Ismail was

5 years of age and soon after the occurrence his statement
-6-
Ex.PW2/D-1 and Ex.PW2/2 was recorded by Ilaqa Judicial

Magistrate on 22.05.2010 and before recording his statement
his intelligence and capacity of understating were put to test by
the Magistrate and after due satisfaction that the child was
giving rational answer, his statement was recorded. Again,
during trial statement of Ismail was recorded, at the age of 12
years and his capability to understand the proceedings were
tested where-after, his statement was recorded. His statement,
on careful analysis, reveals that he described the entire episode
with precision. Though certain variations and omissions in
between his statement recorded under section 161 Cr.P.C and
court statement were highlighted by appellant’s counsel but
these cannot be described as major contradictions, causing any
serious damage to the prosecution case. Defence counsel has
made special reference to the cross examination of PW-2 Ismail
wherein he admitted that after separation of his father and
mother, he never saw his father except at the time of
commission of offence. We are of the considered view that this
reply cannot be taken and evaluated in isolation, rather the
entire statement and sequence of narrations of events shall be
considered conjointly. He has described each and every aspect
of the occurrence with consistency and accuracy. His
subsequent reply to a suggestion is of ultimate significance

when the defence itself put suggestion about the recognition of
-7-
his father to which he answered that “‘it is incorrect to suggest
that I did not recognize my father by face” This leave no room
to nurture any doubt about his veracity. He has been put to
lengthy and scorching cross examination but despite his tender
age he stood firm to his stance. The appellant/convict is the real
father of PW-2 Ismail and at the time of occurrence he was only
5 years of age and therefore, it cannot be said that he was
tutored or his statement was derived through outside influence.
In such circumstances when 5 persons were done to death, then
substitution of real culprits with the appellant/convict, would
not appeal to mind. Thus the statement of PW-2 Ismail was
found to be straight forward and conscious inspiring and any
minor contradiction shall not be sufficient to discard his
testimony. For arriving to this conclusion, guidance is taken
from case law reported in 2002 SCMR page-1247, wherein the
August Supreme Court of Pakistan has laid that’-

We have carefully examined the

contentions as agitated on behalf of

petitioner in the light of relevant

provisions of law and record of the case.

We have minutely perused the judgment

dated 21-6-2000 passed by the learned

Special Court and the judgment impugned.

The entire evidence has been evaluated

with care and caution. We have not been

persuaded to agree with the prime

contention of Mr. Rab Nawaz Khan Niazi,

learned Advocate Supreme Court who

appeared on behalf of petitioner that the

statement of Salman (P.W.14)- should
have been discarded being a child witness
-8-

coupled with the fact that he was not
present at the spot for the reason that the
said plea has been raised in oblivion of the
reality as record is indicative of the fact
that Salman (P.W.14) used to accompany
his sister Kiran to the house of petitioner
being their tutor as such the question of his
absence from the place of occurrence does
not arise by whom information of
unfortunate incident was communicated to
his father. A careful scrutiny of his
statement would reveal that it is not only
worthy of credence and _ confidence-
inspiring but consistent and
straightforward having the ring of truth
and innocence. Salman (P.W.14) stood
firm to the test of cross-examination in
spite of various searching questions and
nothing advantageous could be elicited.
The learned trial Court has put various
questions and on the basis of answers
given by Salman (P.W.14) he was found
intelligent enough to portrait the facts of
event and accordingly his statement was
recorded. In such view of the matter we are
of the considered view that the statement
of Salman (P.W.14) has rightly been
considered and relied upon by the learned
trial Court as well, as learned Division
Bench of the High Court. We have
absolutely no hesitation in our mind that
on the basis of such statement conviction
could safely be awarded.

To further fortify this view, reliance can be placed on the case
of Haroon Rasheed and 6 others —Versus—State 2005 SCMR
1568 (d) in para 11, wherein the august Supreme Court, while

placing reliance on the testimony of ocular evidence, have held

“Tt may also be observed that no material
inconsistencies have been pointed out by
-9-

the learned counsel for the defence
considering that it would only be material
discrepancies coming into conflict with the
material probabilities that would militate
against the credibility of witnesses
justifying the rejection of testimony.”

The ocular testimony of PW Ismail is further corroborated by
recovery in the shape of garments of the deceased Ex.P-10 to
Ex.P-16, having blood and bullet corresponding cut marks,
taken vide recovery memo Ex.PW6/2 , one magazine loaded
with 6 rounds of 30 bore ExP-6, 12 empties of 30 bore ExP-2, 3
spent bullet ExP-8 pieces of quilt ExP-1 to ExP-5, two bulbs
recovered from the wall near the kitchen and from inside the
room Ex.P-9. All the articles containing blood i.e garments and
pieces of quilts were sent to the FSL and report Ex.PW7/14
confirms the same to have human blood. Similarly, post
mortem of all the five deceased were conducted and these
confirms not only the death through fire arms but the probable
duration of 6 to 7 hours between death and post mortem. Thus
all recoveries completely corroborate the prosecution version.

9. Besides, PW-2 Ismail, prosecution also examined PW-3
Mst. Meraj Bibi, mother of Ismail, PW-4 Imran Khan, PW-6
Muhammad Fazal, the recovery memo witnesses, while
statement of Abdul Aziz (Retd) SI was recorded as PW-7.

Though there may be some minor variations and contradictions
-10-

in their statements but when an incident of such a magnitude
occur, wherein the entire family is massacred, then it is not
expected that witnesses would remember each and every fact in
a mechanical manner, especially when the witnesses are
examined after 8/9 years of the occurrence. Thus, in all,
prosecution has convincingly proved that it was the appellant/
convict who committed the offence.

10. Record divulge that appellant/convict Muhammad Tahir
remained fugitive from law for almost 6 years and he was
arrested on 15.10.2016 and at the time of arrest one 3 bore
pistol, without number, alongwith a magazine loaded with 5
live rounds and a separate case FIR No.365 dated 16.10.2016
under section 15 AA KTS was registered against him. The said
pistol as produced to the IO by the moharrir of PS who took the
same through recovery memo Ex.PW8/1. The pistol alongwith
empties recovered from the scene of occurrence, were
dispatched to the FSL and report thereof is Ex.PW.13/3 which
shows that twelve, 30 bore crime empties C-1 to C-12 were
fired from 30 bore pistol and result is positive. Thus it further
provided corroboration to the prosecution story.

11. As stated in the preceeding para of this judgment, the
appellant/convict soon after the occurrence got absconded and
was arrested on 15.10.2016. Though accused may abscond to

avoid his arrest due to false implication or fear of police and
-ll-
therefore abscondence alone is not to be made basis for
conviction but when there is sufficient material available on
record to connect the accused with the crime then abscondence
would be considered a strong corroborative piece of evidence.
In this respect guidance can be derived from the case law of
Qaiser Khan and others —Versus- The State, reported in 2009
SCMR 471, wherein the August Supreme Court of Pakistan in
para No.11 has authoritatively held that ;-

“No doubt abscondence by itself is not

sufficient to convict an accused person but

is strong piece of corroborative evidence

of the other direct and circumstantial

evidence in the case. When an accused

person remains fugitive from the law for

long time without any plausible and

reasonable explanation, then his conduct

after the occurrence becomes indicative of

his guilt when it is considered in

conjunction with the ocular and

circumstantial evidence, as held by this

Court in Mst. Roheeda v. Khan Bahadur

and another 1992 SCMR 1036.”
12. In view what has been discussion above, it is held that
prosecution has successfully proved its case beyond shadow of
doubt against the appellant/convict and the learned trial court,
after thoroughly considering all aspect of the case, has properly
appreciated the record which is unexceptionable, hence,
findings recorded by the learned trial court and conviction and

sentence passed thereon are upheld and resultantly this

Criminal Appeal No.365-A/2019 is dismissed.
-12-

13. So far as Criminal Revision filed by the complainant
Imran Khan is concerned, irrespective of the fact that
prosecution has proved that it was the appellant/convict who
committed the offence but is on record that his wife was living
separately one year prior to the occurrence and she had also
filed suit for dissolution of marriage etc, however, it has not
surfaced on the record as to what has prompted him to murder
entire family of his wife, who he could kill his wife easily,
which means that something had happened immediately before
the occurrence which compelled him to kill the entire family of
his in-laws hence, this provide a valid mitigating circumstance
to award lesser punishment to him, and therefore, conviction
and sentence awarded to the appellant/convict seems

appropriate hence the connected Criminal Revision No.55-

A/2019 is also dismissed.

Announced,

Dt.05.10.2022.
JUDGE
JUDGE

Muhammad Tariq SSG
(DB) Honourble Mr. Justice Wiqgar Ahmad
& Honourable Mr Justice Fazal Subhan.
