Tajamiul] es

JUDGMENT SHEET
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
MINGORA BENCH (DAR-UL-QAZA), SWAT
(Judicial Department)

Cr.M.BA. No.390-M/2015.

JUDGMENT

Date of hearing: 26.10.2015.

Petitioners: (Muhammad Irshad and 1 other) by
Mr. Abdul Halim Naimatkhel, Advocate

Respondents: (State etc) by
Mr. Faheem Naeem Advocate, State
counsel.

HAIDER ALI KHAN, J.- Through the instant

petition, the petitioners seek their release on bail in

case FIR No.146 dated 17.4.2015 under sections

457/380/411 PPC, 14 OAPO registered against them

at Police Station Kabal, District Swat.

2. As per contents of the FIR, allegations

against the accused/ petitioners are that they broke

opened the locks of Sharafat Mobile Zone and

Amaraat Super Store situated at Kala Kalay, Swat,

and stole away various objects from the said shops

which later on were recovered on their pointation.

[B.A No. 390-M of 2015 Muhammad lrshad & another Vs. The State and another]
Tajamiul] es

3. Arguments heard and record perused.
4. In light of arguments, perusal of the
record would reveal that prior to the instant petition
the accused/petitioners and two other co-accused
had already moved bail petition bearing Cr.M B.A
No. 198-M/2015 which was dismissed to the extent
of the present accused/petitioners on 29.6.2015. The
petitioners have moved the instant petition on the
ground that the complainant has_ effected
compromise with them, hence, they be released on
bail.
5. No doubt, compromise in non
compoundable offences can be considered a good
ground for the purpose of bail, however,
heinousness of the offences and peculiar facts and
circumstances of the present case cannot be ignored.
Moreso, the complainant in his affidavit and
compromise deed has stated that:

col ABS Ollie Glug 23 cil Ge ot

TO pum 9S Ty ClaSbe 23 Gal 2 GS la
Ms lad GES SS cil lil a ob

[B.A No. 390-M of 2015 Muhammad lrshad & another Vs. The State and another]
Tajamiul] es

In these circumstances the Court cannot turn its ears

deaf on the interests of the society and granting or

refusing bail by the Courts must reflect perfect

balance between the conflicting interests viz,

sanctity of individual’s liberty and the interests of

the society as visualized in case reported as 2014

P.Cr.LJ (Balochistan) 178. Therefore, at this stage

the petitioners are not entitled to the concession of

bail.

6. In view of what has been discussed

above, this bail petition is dismissed. The trial Court

is directed to conclude the trial within a period of

four months positively, however, if the trial Court

fails to conclude the trial within the stipulated period

in that eventuality the petitioners shall be deemed to

have been released on bail provided they furnish bail

bonds in the sum of Rs:100,000/- (rupees one

hundred thousand) each with two sureties each in the

like amount to the satisfaction of the trial Court.

[B.A No. 390-M of 2015 Muhammad lrshad & another Vs. The State and another]
Needless to mention that the learned trial Court shall

confirm that the sureties are local, reliable and men

of means. Moreover, any delay at the expense of the

accused or their counsel shall not be counted

towards the above referred timeline of four months.

The instant bail petition is disposed of

in the above terms.

Announced.
Dt: 26.10.2015. JUDGE
