JUDGMENT SHEET
PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, PESHAWAR

JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT

Cr.M.BA No.2658-P/2019
“Saif-Ullah Vs. The State”

Date ofhearing 27.09.2019

Petitioner(s) by: Mr. Abid Ayub,
Advocate.

Respondent(s) by: Ms. Saman Shahzad,
Advocate/Standing
Counsel for State.
JUDGMENT
weet

AHMAD ALI, J. Saifullah s/o Saif-ul-
Malook, accused-petitioner, seeks his post
arrest bail in case FIR No.361 dated
24.04.2019 for offence under Section 9 (C)
CNSA, registered at Police Station Khazana,
District Peshawar.

2. Brief facts of the case, as per contents of
the FIR, are that on spy information regarding
smuggling of charas to Punjab through a
Hiace/Flying Coach, the local police of police
station Khazana made nakabandi at Northern
Bypass near Charsadda Road, Peshawar. In the
meanwhile, a passenger Hiace/Flying Coach,
which was going from Peshawar to Punjab was
stopped and the passengers were checked. On

search a passenger who was seated in back
seat, having black shopping bag in his hand,
04-Kg of charas pukhta were recovered. 5/5
grams charas were separated for the purpose of
FSL analysis and rest of contraband were
sealed in a separate parcel. On query, the
person from whose possession the contraband
was recovered, disclosed his name as Saifullah
s/o Saif-ul-Malook 1/o Khazana_ Payan.
Accordingly, he was arrested and the said FIR
was lodged.
3. Accused-petitioner approached the
Court of learned Additional Sessions Judge-V,
Peshawar for his release on bail but his bail
application was dismissed vide order dated
09.07.2019. Hence, the instant Bail Petition.
4. Arguments of the learned counsel for the
parties heard and record perused with their
valuable assistance.
5. Allegation against the petitioner is that
he was apprehended by the local police while
having 4000 grams charas in his possession. In
this regard, wisdom could be gain from the
judgment reported in 20/2 P.Cr.L.J 1901,
wherein it was held;
“It is settled law that the
quantum of sentence has to be

commensurate with the quantum of

substance recovered, hence this court
doubts the petitioner can be awarded
maximum sentence for possessing 4 Kgs.
of charas. Needless to say that the court
while hearing the petition for bail is not
supposed to keep in mind the maximum
sentence provided by the Statute but the
one, which is likely to be entailed by the
facts and circumstances of the case,
especially, when the ultimate conviction,

if any, can repair the wrong caused by

the mistaken relief of bail.”

6. So, in the given circumstances and while
taking guidance from the judgment (supra), in
the instant case the quantum of sentence is to
be determined by the learned trial Court, after
recording of evidence. It is the consistent view
of this Court that for the purpose of bail in
such like offences the quantity of contraband
and the expected quantum of punishment to be
awarded at the trial has to be taken into
account while allowing bail to the accused
persons. Reliance could be safely placed on
2013 MLD 1703.

7. Being a case of prior information, whole
the proceedings were conducted by an ASI
which is violative of the governing provisions
of the law on the subject. The Samples
separated for FSL were sent to the laboratory
after delay of 6 days, which also makes the
case of prosecution to be doubtful coupled

with the fact that no independent witness was
associated with the recovery of contraband.
Besides, no statement of the driver or cleaner
was recorded by the IO.

8. Moreover, the accused-petitioner is
juvenile as he has placed on record his school
leaving certificate in original, which shows his
date of birth to be 23.03.2002 i.e. less than 18
years. Investigation in the case is complete and
the accused-petitioner is no more required to
the prosecution.

6. Before parting with the judgment, this
Court finds it necessary that the observations
rendered by the High Court while disposing
bail applications are not to be considered
during the trial of the accused. In this regard
the august Supreme Court of Pakistan in
Shuaib Mehmood Butt Vs. Iftekharul Hag
(1996 SCMR 1845) has rendered clear
guidance, which is to the effect that:-

“However we would like to point out in no
certain terms that the observations made by
the High Court in the orders granting bail and
by us in this order are confined to tentative
assessment made for the purpose of disposal
of bail applications and not intended to
influence the mind of the trial Court, which is
free to appraise the evidence strictly according
to its merits and the law of the time of disposal
of the case, which of course it is needless to

say, is the function of the trial Court”.
7. Thus, taking tentative assessment of the
available record, case of the accused-petitioner
squarely falls under sub-section (2) of section
497 Cr.P.C. call for further probe into the
matter.

8. Consequently, this petition is allowed

and the accused-petitioner Saifullah is

admitted to bail, provided he furnishes bail

bonds in the sum of Rs.100,000/- (one lac)

with two sureties each in the like amount to the

satisfaction of Illaqa/Duty Judicial Magistrate.

9. Above are the detailed reasons of short

order of even date.

JUDGE

Announced on;
27.09.2019.

AMIAD PS SB HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE AHMAD ALI

