IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
BANNU BENCH

(Judicial Department)

Cr. Misc: BA No.290-B of 2017.
Asif Iqbal
Vs
The State etc.

JUDGEMENT/ORDER.
Date of hearing 25.7.2017
Appellant-Petitioner: Asif Iqbal/Asif

Rehman By Mukhtiar Ali Khan _ Khattak,
Advocate.

Respondent: State By Shahid Hameed
Qureshi, Addl: AG,
Others By Mirza Ali Khan Khattak, Advocate.

SHAKEEL AHMAD, J.- Through Cr. Misc: BA

No.290-B/2017, the petitioner Asif Iqbal son of

Asif Rehman seeks post arrest bail in case FIR

No.317 dated 27.6.2017 registered under sections

324/34 PPC at Police Station Karak.

IN

The prosecution case as set forth in
the FIR are that the complainant namely Ahmad

Khan brought his injured nephew (Muhammad
-2-

Iftikhar Khan) in emergency room of KDA

Hospital, Karak, who was not in senses and

reported the matter to the police that he along with

his nephew Muhammad Iftikhar Khan was going

to see Malik Hamzullah to say Eid Mubarak to

him, when they reached near the house of the said

Malik Hamzullah, in the meanwhile accused Asif

Iqbal, Javed Iqbal sons of Aya Gul, armed with

Kalashnikovs, appeared, and on seeing them

accused Javed Iqbal raised a Lalkara and asked

Asif Iqbal to kill them. On this accused Asif Iqbal,

who was armed with Kalashnikov, opened firing

with the intention to kill them, as a result of which

his nephew Muhammad Iftikhar Khan was hit and

fell on the ground and lost his senses, luckily, he

escaped unhurt. The motive as alleged in the FIR

is dispute over property. The complainant charged

the accused for attempting at their lives. The

prayer of the accused/petitioner for bail was
-3-

declined by the learned Additional Sessions Judge

vide order dated 15.7.2017, hence, this petition.

I~

The learned counsel for the petitioner

argued that the medicolegal report does not

support the contention of the complainant. He

further argued that though the accused is charged

for indiscriminate firing at the complainant and

injured but no empty was recovered from the

place of occurrence. He further argued that the

injury sustained by the injured is simple. He lastly

argued that regarding the same incident a case

FIR No.339 dated 27.6.2017 under sections

506/337-A(i)/148/149 PPC at Police Station

Karak has been registered against the complainant

party, which makes the prosecution case as one of

further inquiry into the guilt of the accused/

petitioner, therefore, he is entitled for the

concession of bail.

4. As against that the learned counsel

for the complainant vehemently contended that
-4-

though the nature of injury sustained by the

injured is simple in nature, but it is on the vital

part of the body i.e. scalp. The accused has

specifically been charged in the FIR for the

commission of offence. It is a broad daylight

occurrence, therefore, there is no chance of mis-

identification. He lastly argued that the offence

for which the accused/petitioner is charged, hit by

the prohibitory clause of section 497 Cr.P.C,

therefore, the accused is not entitled to the

concession of bail. He placed reliance on 2012

MLD 377 and 2015 PCrLJ 1409.

3. The learned AAG appearing for the

State, supported the contention of the learned

counsel for the complainant.

6. Arguments heard and record perused.

6. Perusal of the record reveals that the

injured has sustained a lacerated wound on his

scalp and the neurosurgeon described it to be

simple. Though indiscriminate firing was made by
-5-

the accused with his Kalashnikov, but no recovery

of empties was effected from the place of

occurrence and a counter FIR has been registered

against the complainant party by the brother of the

accused Javed Iqbal vide FIR No.339 dated

27.6.2017. The case law quoted by the learned

counsel for the complainant is out of context.

Each criminal case is to be examined on its own

facts and circumstances. At the moment, it is yet

to be determined during trial, after recording pro

and contra evidence, as to which of the two

versions is correct, which makes the case of the

petitioner arguable for the purpose of bail, hence,

he is entitled to the concession of bail. Reliance is

placed on the case “Dr. Younas Vs. The State

and another” (2016 P.Cr.L.J 1746) and

“Muhammad Younas Vs. The State and

another” (2010 P.Cr.L.J 807).

7. Accordingly, the Cr. Misc: BA

No.290-B/2017 is allowed and the accused is
-6-

admitted to bail, provided he furnishes bail bonds

in the sum of Rs.1,00,000/- (rupees one lac) with

two sureties each in the like amount to the

satisfaction of learned Illaqa Judicial Magistrate/

MOD concerned. The sureties must be local,

reliable and men of means.

Announced.
25.7.2017
JUDGE

Ihsan*/-
