JUDGMENT SHEET

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
MINGORA BENCH (DAR-UL-QAZA), SWAT
(Judicial Department)

Cr.M.B.C.A. No. 120-M of 2017
JUDGMENT
Date of hearing: 08.03.2018

Petitioner:- (Tajbar Khan) by Mr. Faya
Muhammad Qazi, Advocate.

Respondents: - (the State & 1 another) by

Malak Sarwar Khan, State counsel and

Muhammad Yar Yousafzai, Advocate.
MOHAMMAD IBRAHIM KHAN, J.- Write up the

grounds from Serial (A) to (E) in this petition, here
is calling for acceptance of this bail cancellation
petition, where the learned Court of Sessions
Judge/Zila Qazi Dir Lower at Timergara by his
order dated 12.9.2017 allowed the post arrest bail to
accused/Respondent No. 2 Jehan Bahadar directing
him to furnish bonds in the sum of Rs. 100,000/-
(one lac) with two sureties on his involvement in
case FIR No. 18 dated 28.3.1981 under sections
302,34 PPC read with 512 Cr.P.C registered at

Police Station Khall District Dir Lower.

2. The extracts of 'Murasila' Ex. PW-4/1
followed by lodging of First Information Report
Ex. PW-4/2 would reveal that Station House

Officer of Police Station Khall upon receipt of clue

Nawab (S.B.) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Ibrahim Khan
that a murder had taken place at the vicinity of
Toormang Dara for confirmation proceeded to the
spot. Where on the way at a place known as
Shakolai the complainant Ghulam Muhammad
reported him the matter that his nephew
Faqir Shehzada about two (2) days back went to the
house of his sister situated at Toormang Dara.
Yesterday at evening time, he was present at the
house of his brother Shah Zaman when in the
meanwhile, Lal Badshah, Shamkai, Azeem,
Muhammad Hakeem and Muhammad Yaqoob
residents of Kandaoo Toormang Dara brought the
corpse of said Faqir Shehzada in a cot. One
Muhammad Yaqoob informed him that he was
present in his landed property, upon hearing firing
when he was attracted to the spot he saw the
accused Naseeb-ur-Rahman armed with shotgun
Jehan Bahader and Rahim Bahader armed with
rifles started firing upon the deceased
Faqir Shahzada who at that time was going towards
village Patau Gaunai . From firing of these accused,
the deceased was hit and died at the spot. The
accused after commission of the offence bolted away
from the spot. The complainant further stated that he
has no enmity with anyone, however, a few days

back the deceased had quarreled with the proclaimed

Nawab (S.B.) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Ibrahim Khan
3

offender and the deceased might have been killed

due to this reason.

3. Having heard learned counsel for the
Petitioner, learned counsel for the accused-
Respondent No. 2 and learned State counsel,
record gone through with their valuable

assistance.

4, Learned counsel for the Petitioner
referred to 2017 _P Cr. LJ 1080 (Peshawar
Abbottabad Bench) "Ayesha _Bibi_V/S_Talha
Mehmood _and_another", 2018 MLD _ 176

Uslamabad) "Yasir Khan and others V/S The

State and_another"’ and 2018 MLD 72
(Peshawar) "Bakhtiar Khan V/S The State and
another" and thereby without any exaggeration
and hesitancy prayed for acceptance of this bail
cancellation petition in view of long-standing
absconsion of the accused/Respondent No. 2
which prevailed over a period of almost near to
4 decades. Learned State counsel being on
compromising terms with the learned counsel for
the complainant (Petitioner) | vehemently
supported his arguments and dictums relied upon

by him of the Hon'ble superior Courts. On the

Nawab (S.B.) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Ibrahim Khan
wet

other hand, learned counsel for the
accused/Respondent No. 2 while responding to
the arguments of his opposite counsel at the very
beginning submitted that it is a cardinal principle
almost settled by the plethora of judgments of the
Hon'ble superior Courts that absconsion being
primarily a corporative piece of evidence in no
way could solely be considered in respect of
refusal of bail to an accused when otherwise he is
entitled to the same concession on merits being a
case of further inquiry. In support of this analogy,
he placed reliance on 2012 P Cr. LJ 1119
(Peshawar) "Ahmad_Ali_Jan_V/S_Irfan_and
another", 2010 P Cr. LJ 911 (Peshawar) "
Inamullah V/S_Zakirullah Khan and another",
2010 P Cr. LJ 1324 (Peshawar) "Mst. Amina
Bibi V/S Muhammad Amin and 2 others", 2004
SCMR_231_" Muzafar Iqbal V/S Muhammad
Imran_Aziz and others", 2010 P Cr. LJ 1648
(ahore) "Ehsan-ul-Hag V/S Muhammad Khan
and_another", 2012 YLR_ 1702 (Peshawar) "
Najeeb Ullah V/S Fazal Rabi and another" and

2012 YLR 1942 (Peshawar) Muhammad Ishfaq
V/S Sher Ahmad and 3 others".

Nawab (S.B.) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Ibrahim Khan
5. The accused/Respondent No. 2 Jehan
Bahadar has been declared proclaimed offender in
Sessions trial No. 16 of the year 2000 decided by
the Court of learned Additional Sessions Judge
Dir Bala Camp Court at Wari on 12.10.2000. He
is arrested as per card of arrest on 21.8.2017. It
means that accused/Respondent No. 2 has
remained fugitive from law for quite handsome
period of 38 years and 5 months. It is absolutely a
record remaining under absconsion. Where the
role attributed to him (Respondent No. 2) is on
the same footing as that of co-acquitted accused
(Rahim Bahadar) and co-absconding accused
(Naseeb Rahman). In this case, there is no
eyewitness and the report is lodged on getting
information through complainant Ghulam
Muhammad by Muhammad Amin Khan SHO.
There is delay of more than 30 hours not even
been explained. Firing is attributed to three
assailants including the accused/Respondent No.
2 Jehan Bahadar but there is only one recovery of
crime empty which suggest the act of one of the
accused named and charged for the murder of
deceased Faqir Shehzada. The most redeeming

feature of this case is that the deceased was

Nawab (S.B.) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Ibrahim Khan
wor

buried prior to lodging of the FIR and that too
without being examined by a medical expert to
establish the cause of death even may be natural
or through other reason might occurred leaving a
lot of space for further inquiry into the guilt of

the accused/Respondent No. 2.

6. Learned counsel for Petitioner is
more underscoring and accentuating for the
recalling of the order dated 12.9.2017 passed by
the learned Sessions Judge/Zila Qazi chiefly the
ever long absconsion period of the
accused/Respondent No. 2 when certainly was in
the knowledge of the holding of trial and
acquittal of his brother co-accused Rahim
Bahadar. Learned counsel for the Petitioner
(complainant) is however principally agreed with
scope of further inquiry of the guilt of
accused/Respondent No. 2. Thereby when an
accused is otherwise entitled as of right to the
grant of post arrest bail then mere absconsion for
the record period of 38 years and 5 months will
not stand as hurdle in release on bail. There are
surfeit and over-abundance the dictums of the

Hon'ble Superior Courts of Pakistan. Some of

‘Nawab (S.B.) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Ibrahim Khan
these are:- 2012 SCMR 1137" Ehsan Ullah V/S

The State", wherein the relevant citation speaks

of:-

" In a case calling for further inquiry
into the guilt of accused, bail is to be
allowed to him as of right and not by
way of grace or concession. Mere
abscondence of accused person may not

be sufficient to refuse bail to him."

Similar view has earlier been adopted
in a case law cited as 2009 SCMR 299 "Mitho
Pitafi V/S The State" in the following manner:-

" High Court as well as the Trial Court
had rejected the bail of petitioner on
account of his absconsion and not on
merit. Validity. Bail could be granted, if
accused had good case for bail on merits
and mere his absconsion would not

come in the way of while granting him
bail."

Likewise, keeping same rational in
sight the Hon'ble Peshawar High Court
Abbottabad Bench formed the following opinion
in its recent judgment reported as 2018 P Cr. LJ

153." Sher Azfal and others V/S The State and

others"

"Absconsion of accused. Mere

absconsion would not be sufficient when

‘Nawab (S.B.) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Ibrahim Khan
otherwise a case for bail in view of the
peculiar facts and circumstances was

made out."
7. In view of all these glaring
elements coupled with ratio decidendi settled in
the above cited dictums of the Hon'ble superior
Courts , the learned Sessions Judge concerned
very rightly for all the right reasons granted the
concession of post arrest bail to the
accused/Respondent No. 2. through the
impugned order being a case of further inquiry
discarding the long-standing absconsion of the
accused/Respondent No. 2 being a corroborative

piece of evidence.

8. Above all, it is settled principle of
law that grounds for cancellation of bail are
altogether different from that of grant of bail
and once bail is granted by a Court of
competent jurisdiction, it is rarely interfered
with, unless the impugned order is palpably
illegal, arbitrary and perverse or against the
record. No such infirmity has been pointed out

in the present case.

‘Nawab (S.B.) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Ibrahim Khan
9. In view of the above, this bail
cancellation petition is not worth of any

credence, which is hereby dismissed.

po -
Announced es
Dt: 08.3.2018 JUDGE

‘Nawab (S.B.) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Ibrahim Khan
