pee

JUDGMENT SHEET

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
MINGORA BENCH (DAR-UL-QAZA), SWAT
(Judicial Department)

Cr.M B.A. No. 465-M/2017.
JUDGMENT
Date of hearing: 26.10.2017

Petitioner:- _(Mst._Samina) by Muhammad
Anwar, Advocate.

Respondents:- (the State & 1 another) by Mr.
Rafig Ahmad, Astt: Advocate General

MOHAMMAD _ IBRAHIM KHAN, _J.- On her

implication, the accused/Petitioner Mst. Samina
in case FIR No. 1201 dated 26.09.2017 charged
under section 9 (C) CNSA registered at Police
Station Ghalegay District Swat is optimistic for

the grant of her post arrest bail.

2. Prior to, the prayer of the Petitioner
for the similar relief before the Court of learned
Additional Sessions Judge-VI/Izafi Zila Qazi
Swat through an application No. 529/4 of the
year 2017 was dismissed in slipshod manner for

reasons that "it is found that accused/Petitioner

has_got direct nexus with commission of a non-

bailable_offence_falling within _the_restrictive

Nawab (S.B.) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Mohammad Ibrahim Khan
=

clause of statutory provision of procedural law.

The __ prosecution _has collected _ sufficient
material connecting the accused/Petitioner with
the commission of _a_non-bailable offence.

Hence, the application was stood dismissed."

3. The contents of the 'Murasila'
followed by lodging of the First Information
Report would reveal that Kaleem Jan ASI
alongwith other police party were present at
Landaki Check Post and had fenced the road,
when a Flying Coach emerged from Malakand
side, was halted on account of suspicion. The
present accused/Petitioner was seated in the
front seat of the Flying Coach, after cursory
interrogation by the Lady Constable when
belonging in shape of AIWA TV of the lady
accused was searched out, it contained 6 packets
of Chars wrapped up with yellow solution tape.
After weighment of all the packets, total of
which came out to 7200 grams. Out of each
packet 5/5 grams were separated for chemical
analysis while the rest 7170 grams were sealed

into separate parcels.

Nawab (S.B.) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Mohammad Ibrahim Khan
3
4. Having heard arguments of learned
counsel for the Petitioner and learned Astt:
Advocate General for the State, record with

their assistance gone through.

5. No doubt huge quantity of Chars
weighing 7200 grams have been allegedly
recovered from the T.V if owned by the present
accused/Petitioner contained in 6 _ packets
wrapped up with yellow solution tape and the
offence being non-bailable in view of the
section 9 (C) CNSA read with section 51 of the
ibid Act, but whether accused/Petitioner has
conscious knowledge of the contraband Chars in
question or otherwise, this aspect of the case
would be thrashed-out by the learned Trial
Court after recording of the evidence.
Moreover, the lady accused was seated in front
alongside of the driver whereas the AIWA TV
uo — was found beneath the rear seat occupied by the
other passenger. It is astonishing that the police
officials could smell the contraband packed in
TV set but none of the passenger was even with

unstuffy and airy nose who could not smell all

Nawab (S.B.) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Mohammad Ibrahim Khan
the way and even objected to that Chars was
transporting by any of the travelling passengers

other than the accused/Petitioner with suckling

baby.

6. Above all, the accused/Petitioner
has 2/3 years old suckling baby by the name of
Mst. Duaa in her custody, as per information
conveyed by the concerned Muharir warrant of
District Jail Timergara. In this respect, reliance
has been placed on the case law cited as
2011 YLR 2975 (Peshawar) " Mst. Kabela vs
the State", wherein the relevant citation

enunciates:-

"Accused though was directly

involved in the narcotics case, but

a suckling baby was along with the

accused who had been behind the

bars for the last two months.

Welfare of minor at such a stage

would be taken into account. This

po judgment further avers that Holy
oe Prophet peace be upon him in case
of "Ghamidiyyah" had suspended

the sentence of pregnant woman,

not only till delivery of the child,

but also postponed the same till

suckling period i.e. two years for

Nawab (S.B.) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Mohammad Ibrahim Khan
welfare of the child which showed
paramount and significance of the
right of a suckling child in Islam.
Held, woman having suckling
child, should not be detained and
granted bail, in such

circumstances. Order accordingly."
Ts In view of the above and while
deriving wisdom from the above-referred
judgment, there is no need to further keep the
Petitioner in jail for an indefinite period,
therefore, Petitioner is released on bail subject
to furnishing bail bonds in the sum of
Rs. 200,000/- (Rupees two lacs) with two
sureties each in the like amount to the
satisfaction of learned Trial Court, who shall
ensure that the sureties are local, reliable and

men of means.

8. These are the reasons of my short

order of even date.

Announced oo
Dt: 26.10.2017. JUDGE

Nawab (S.B.) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Mohammad Ibrahim Khan
