JUDGMENT SHEET
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
BANNU BENCH.

(Judicial Department)

Cr. Misc: B.A_No. 665-B/2023.

Aslam Khan
Vs
The State .

JUDGMENT

Date of hearing 12.01.2024 .
For petitioner:- = Mr. Ihsan Ullah Khan Bangash,

Advocate.
For State:- Hafiz Muhammad Hanif, AAG.

eR ok ok OK ok

FAZAL SUBHAN, J.-. Having failed to get the concession
of bail from the learned Court below, petitioner Aslam Khan
son of Mamtaz Gul seeks his release on bail through the
instant bail application, in case FIR No. 677 dated
08.12.2023, registered under sections 9 (D) KP CNSA, 2019
(Act) of police station Ghoriwala, District Bannu.

2. In this case, report was lodged by Arshad Ullah
Khan SHO police station Ghoriwala, who during Nakabandi
received information through informer that two persons are
smuggling huge quantity of charas from Mir Ali to Lakki

Marwat in a white colour Suzuki carry van. On the tip of
informer the complainant laid a barricade when in the
meanwhile a carry Suzuki van registration No.CE-
3995/Sindh came to the spot which was stopped. The
driver of the vehicle disclosed his name as Aslam Zaman son
of Khan Zaman while the person sitting along with him was
Aslam Khan son of Mumtaz Gul (the present petitioner).
Their body search was conducted but nothing incriminating
were recovered, however, during cursory interrogation on
the spot, they disclosed that charas are lying in the stepney.
Upon search of the stepney of vehicle, one cloth bag
containing 3 packets of chars, having different quantities,
mentioned in the murasila, with total weight of 3675 grams,
was recovered. Videography of the recovery was conducted
and after separation of samples of 10/10 grams from each
packet, 3 samples parcels were prepared and sealed on the
spot while the remaining quantity was separately sealed. At
the same time the carry van was also taken into possession.
Accordingly murasila was drafted and sent to the police

station for registration of case.

3. Arguments of learned counsel for petitioner and
learned AAG for the State heard and with their able

assistance the record was gone through.
4. After hearing the arguments and_ tentative
assessment of record, though allegedly, at the relevant time
of occurrence the petitioner was travelling along with co-
accused Aslam Zaman, however, during search nothing was
recovered from his personal possession while recovery was
affected from stepeny of the vehicle. The petitioner was
travelling in a carry van with co-accused, who was the
driver of the vehicle and, therefore, at this stage it cannot be
said that the petitioner had the conscious knowledge of the
presence of narcotics in the stepeny of the vehicle and this
fact alone is sufficient to make the case one of further
inquiry into his guilt. Reliance can safely be placed on case
titled Jhussain Ullah-Vs-The State and another, reported
in 2019 SCMR _ 1651, wherein the august Supreme Court
has held as under:-

“"After hearing the learned counsel for the

petitioner, learned Law Officer and perusal

of available record, it has been observed

by us that when the petitioner was arrested

by police, he was not driving the car nor

any narcotic was recovered from his.

exclusive possession rather he was sitting

on the rear seat of the car. Learned Law

Officer has confirmed under instructions of

the police office present in Court that there

is nothing on the record to connect the.

petitioner with the car. In these

circumstances, the case of the petitioner

becomes one of further inquiry falling
within the ambit of section 497 Code of
(?

Criminal Procedure. He is behind the bars
since 16.03.2017 and nothing is to be
recovered from him. In this backdrop, no
useful purpose shall be served by keeping
him incarcerated for an indefinite period"

5. Resultantly, the instant bail petition is accepted
and the petitioner is released on bail provided he furnishes
bail bonds of Rs. 3,00,000/-(Rupees Three Lac) with two
local and reliable sureties each in the like amount to the
satisfaction of trial Court/ Illaqa Judicial Magistrate’) MOD
concerned.

These are the detailed reasons of my short order of
even date.

Announced.
12.01.2024.

Thsan.*/- wee a=]
JUDGE.

(D.B)
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Fazal Subhan.

