7,

~ Judgment Sheet
COURT, P
(Judicial Department)

L.Cr, A No, 1558-P/2019
Niaz Ahmad..Vs..The State

JUDGMENT
Date ofhearing =: 24.9.2020

Appellant by : Mr. Ali Gohar Durrani, Advocate
Respondent by —: Mr. Arshad Ahmad, AAG

akok aK

SM ATTIQUE SHAH, J. This appeal under S. 410 Cr.PC
read with S. 48 of CNSA, 1997 has been preferred by the
appellant, Niaz Ahmad, against the judgment dated
18.11.2019 passed by the learned Additional Sessions
Judge-II/Judge, Model Criminal Trial Court, Kohat,
whereby, the appellant has been convicted and sentenced
in case FIR No.388 dated 21.12.2016 under S. 9-C CNSA
registered at Police Station Jarma, District Kohat to
imprisonment for life and; also sentenced to pay a fine of
Rs.3,00,000/- and in default, to serve six months Simple
Imprisonment; benefit of S. 382-B Cr.PC was extended to

the convict/appellant.

2. Precise but relevant facts leading to the present
case are that, on 21.12.2016, complainant Gul Janan,
Inspector upon spy information of trafficking huge
quantity of narcotic in a Flying Coach No.MII-4065, via

Indus Highway laid picket alongwith other police officials
at Muslim Abad Check Post; in the meantime, the said
Flying Coach being driven by Naqeeb-ur-Rahman in
company of Niaz Ahmad coming from Kohat side was
intercepted. The complainant noted double floor in the
vehicle, hence, he opened the floor with tools and from
secret cavity recovered 74 packets Chars Garda, total
weighing 74 Kilograms. The complainant separated
05/05 grams from each packet as sample for FSL analysis,
packed & sealed the same in parcel No.1 to 74 while the
remaining contraband was packed & sealed in another
parcel No.75, whereafter, murasila (Ex.PW.2/2) was sent
to Police Station and instant case was registered vide FIR

(Ex.PA).

3. On completion of investigation, complete challan
was submitted before the court. Since, co-accused
Naqeeb-ur-Rahman was released on bail but
subsequently, was arrested in another criminal case and
was confined at District Jail, Mianwali (Punjab), therefore,
his case was separated under S. 540-A (2) Cr.PC. Charge
against the accused/appellant was framed to which he

pleaded not guilty and claimed trial.

4. In order to prove and bring home the charges
leveled against him, the prosecution produced and
examined as many as nine (09) PWs. After closure of

prosecution evidence, statement of the accused was
recorded u/s 342 Cr.PC, wherein, he negated the charges

leveled against him and posed innocence.

5. Arguments of learned counsel for the accused-
appellant and learned AAG on behalf of the State heard

and record with their valuable assistance gone through.

6. The case of prosecution against the convict/
appellant is that, on 21.12.2016, the complainant got spy
information regarding trafficking of huge quantity of
narcotic via Flying Coach No.4065-MIl, upon which he
alongwith other police contingent laid picket at Muslim
Abad Check Post and; when found the said Flying Coach
coming towards Kohat was stopped for the purpose of
checking. Naqeeb-ur-Rahman, was driving the said
vehicle whereas convict/appellant was sitting in front
seat. During search of the vehicle in question, the
complainant noted that there was double floor beneath
the seats thus, he opened the rear bumper beneath the
grill with the help of tools and found double floor having
secret cavity, in which 74 packets of Chars Garda were
lying. The contraband was taken out and weighed with
digital scale; each packet was containing 1/1 kilogram
Chars Garda, as such, total Chars Garda was came out to
be 74 Kilograms. The complainant separated 5/5 grams
Chars Garda from each packet as sample for FSL analysis

and sealed the same in Parcel No.1 to 74 whereas the
remaining quantity was sealed in Parcel No.75. The
complainant affixed 3/3 seals of monogram SM over the
parcels, however, the said monogram does not signify
the name of the seizing officer PW-2 namely Gul Janan
Khan Inspector. No explanation was offered as to why
the said parcels did not contain the monogram of
seizing officer, as such, has created a serious doubt
regarding the seizer of contraband. 2015 SCMR 291

Akhtar Iqbal V. The State.

7. The complainant has alleged that he had used tools
for opening the secret cavity of the vehicle but, he has
neither specifically mentioned in the murasila nor stated
in his examination in chief that what kinds of tools he had
used and from where he had arranged that tools. The fact
of using tools by the complainant has remained

unspecified during the course of investigation.

8. After conducting the alleged recovery proceedings,
the complainant sent murasila to PS for registration of
case through Faisal Manan, Constable, which was being
received by Khaliq Nawaz, Moharrar, who appeared
before the Court and examined as PW.1 and; stated that
on receipt of murasila, he registered the case vide FIR
Ex.PA. In cross-examination, he stated that; “J only
received murasila” albeit, he has been contradicted by Gul

Rahman SI (Rtd), PW.6 who stated in his cross-
examination that “J received a card of arrest, recovery
memo, murasila and FIR before proceeding to the spot. The
said documents were handed over to me in the PS. I left the
PS at 20:40 hours. If only murasila was brought to Police
Station by Faisal Manan, Constable then after registration
of case, how recovery memo, card of arrest were handed
over to the I.0 of the case in the PS, is a question, which
makes the preparation of above said documents by the

complainant highly doubtful.

9. In acase of narcotic, the recovery of contraband, its
safe transmission to the PS for safe custody and; onward
transmission of samples to the Government Analysts for
its chemical examination is of vital significance. In the
case in hand, recovery of contraband was allegedly
effected on 21.12.2016; but, the sample separated
therefrom were sent to FSL on 03.01.2017 with an
unexplained delay of about 13 days, which was required
to be transmitted to the FSL within 72 hours of its seizer
under S. 4 of the Control of Narcotic Substances
(Government Analyst) Rules, 2001. 2011 SCMR 820
“Muhammad Aslam..Vs..The State”, 2012 PCr.L] 886
“Said Zareen.Vs..The State’, 2018 YLR 1067
(Peshawar) “Imtiaz Ali..Vs..The State”, MLD 2018 702
(Peshawar) “Shan..Vs..The State”. Further, PW.8 namely

Zar Manan No.68 (Rtd) who allegedly took the parcels to
FSL stated in his cross-examination that; “The parcels
were handed over to me by the LO on 03.01.2017. The
parcels were 74 in number. On 03.01.2017, I took the
parcels to the FSL. The 1.0 handed over the parcels,
however, I do not know that the same were lying in those
custody.” There are two Investigating Officers in the
instant case; one is Gul Rahman, SI (Rtd) and other is
Saifullah, ASI. The former though has stated in his
examination in chief that; “I sent parcels No.1 to 74 to the
FSL, vide my application, Ex.PW.6/4 alongwith road
certificate Ex.PW.6/5”". He further stated that; “Thereafter,
I was transferred from the said PS to District Karak and
rest of the investigation was conducted by Saifullah Khan’.
Though this witness has not specifically stated that who
had been given the parcels for transmitting the same to
FSL but, PW.9 Abdul Haq No.247/LHC stated in his cross-
examination that; “The seizing Officer handed over to me
the above mentioned parcels at about 10:00/10:30 PM.
Parcel No.75 remained in my custody for 12 days till arrival
of Haroon-ur-Rahman, IHC from PTC, Hangu. The parcels
of the samples were sent to the FSL by OII’. On the other
hand, PW.7 Saifullah, ASI stated that; “On completion of
investigation, I handed over the case file to the SHO for
submission of interim challan”. In his cross-examination,

he stated that; “I myself have not sent the parcels to the
FSL, rather, the same were sent by my predecessor. Indeed,
it is pertinent to mention here that interim challan was
submitted by the complainant himself on 03.01.2017. On
the same date, Rout Certificate Ex.PW.6/5 was prepared,
none of the Investigating Officers stated that who had
been given the parcels. Thus, it is established on the face
of record that earlier Investigating Officer was not at all
available in the Police Station on 03.01.2017 because of
his transfer to District Karak and; astonishingly on which
date the complainant submitted interim challan before
the Court, then how the road/route certificate Ex.PW.6/5
was prepared on the date of sending the interim challan
to the court. Handing over the parcel to PW.8 is an
exaggerated story putforth by the above said PWs. The
above referred contradictions are of such a nature that it
has vitiated and shattered the intrinsic worth of the

entire evidence so put forth by the prosecution

10. Now coming to the report of FSL (Ex-PZ) that;
whether the same fulfills the requirement of Rule 6 of the
(Government Analysts) Rules, 2001 or otherwise. The
ibid report upon its perusal does not signify the test
protocols that were applied to carry out the test;
therefore, the mandatory requirement of law provided by
Rule 6 has not been complied with in its letter and spirit;

the noncompliance of the ibid Rule would render the said
fate {gery

report inconclusive, suspicious and untrustworthy and;
the same could not be relied upon qua maintaining the
conviction and sentence of the accused/appellant in the
circumstances, as it lacks evidentiary value. 2019 SCMR
930 Khair-UI-Bashar V. The State and 2020 SCMR 196
Muhammad Boota v. The State and another. The ibid
preposition was again reaffirmed by the august Apex
Court in Qaiser Javed Khan's case reported in PLD 2020
Supreme Court 57. The relevant portion is reproduced

below for ready reference;

“Now coming to the report of FSL (EX-PZ) that;
whether the same fulfills the requirement of Rule 6
of the (Government Analysts) Rules, 2001 or
otherwise. The ibid report upon its perusal does not
signify the test protocols that were applied to carry
out the test; therefore, the mandatory requirement
of law provided by Rule 6 has not been complied
with in its letter and spirit and; the noncompliance
of the ibid Rule would render the said report
inconclusive, suspicious and untrustworthy; which
lacks the evidentiary value and the same could not
be relied upon qua maintaining the conviction and
sentence of the accused/appellant. 2019 SCMR 930
Khair-Ul-Bashar v. The State and 2020 SCMR 196
Muhammad Boota V. The State and another. PLD
2020 Supreme Court 57 Qaiser Javed Khan V. The
State through Prosecutor General Punjab, Lahore
and another. The relevant portion is reproduced

below for ready reference;-

6. The Report of the Government Analyst in
this case specifies only the tests applied and not
the protocols thereof. The term "protocol" has

not been defined in the Rules. Its dictionary
res”

meaning is: "A plan of scientific experiment or
other procedure.t” It is also referred to as "the
precise method for carrying out or reproducing a
given experiments." These definitions are in line
with the elaboration of the term "protocol" given
in Imam Bakhsh wherein the Court stated the
expression "protocol" to mean an explicit plan of
an experiment, procedure or test. It is clarified
that "protocol" is, therefore, a recognized
standard method or plan for carrying out the test
applied to ascertain the nature of the substance
under examination. No test can take place
without a _ protocol. The Report of the
Government Analyst must show that the test
applied was in accordance with a recognized
standard protocol. Any test conducted without a
protocol loses its reliability and evidentiary
value. Therefore, to serve the purposes of the Act
and the Rules, the Report of the Government
Analyst must contain (i) the tests applied (ii) the
protocols applied to carry out these tests (iii) the
result of the test(s). This sequence, for clarity and

better understanding can be envisaged as

follows:

Protocols (applied to Results of the

7. Once the above three requirements under
Rule 6 are contained in the Report of the
Government Analyst, any ambiguity therein
may be resolved by the Trial Court by
exercising its power under Proviso to section
510, Cr.P.C. The said provision states that the
Court may, if it considers necessary in the
interest of justice, summon and examine the
person by whom such report has been made.
Therefore, the Trial Court while examining the
said Report has the power to summon the

Government Analyst in case there is any
Weootguwcr”

10

ambiguity in the said Report and seek
clarification thereof. This clarification can only
be based on the existing record of the
Government Analyst and does not mean to
allow the Government Analyst to conduct a
fresh test or prepare another Report, for that
would amount to giving the prosecution a
chance of filling the gaps and lacunas in the
Report. The Trial Court must also be mindful of
the legal position that the per se admissibility
of the Report i.e. without examining the Analyst
(expert) does not vouch for its evidentiary
value, as observed in Khair-ul-Bashar. The
Courts are free to examine the contents of the
Report and to assess its evidentiary value
(weight), a matter distinct from its
admissibility. ,

8. The Report of the Government Analyst in
the instant case does not specify the protocols
of the tests applied and thus does not meet the
requirements of the law as interpreted by this
Court in the cases of Imam Bakhsh and Khair-
ul-Bashar (supra). The said Report cannot be
relied upon for the conviction of the petitioner.
Therefore, the petition is converted into an
appeal and allowed. The conviction and
sentence of the petitioner are set aside. He shall
be released forthwith if not required to be

detained in any other case.”

11. Given that huge quantity of narcotic has
purportedly been shown recovered from the secret
cavities of Flying Coach being driven by co-accused
Naqeeb-ur-Rahman; albeit, safe administration of justice
mandates the Courts to be conscious of not the quantity

of the contraband; but the quality of evidence produced
11

before the Court in reaching to a correct and just decision
of the case. 2010 SCMR 841 Shahzada..vs..The State and

2020 P.Cr.LJ-321 (Peshawar) Abdul Bagi..vs..The State.

12. Another ground which was made basis for
conviction of the convict/appellant is that, he had
allegedly made confession to his guilt before the Court of
learned Judicial Magistrate. It depicts from record of the
case that convict/appellant was arrested on 21.12.2016
and he remained for four days in police custody and;
when produced on 25.12.2016 before the learned Judicial
Magistrate for recording of his confessional statement; he
refused to do so and; thus, was sent to Judicial Lockup.
Whereafter, he allegedly made an application on 17.01.2017
to the Superintendent Jail for recording his statement,
which was marked to the learned Session Judge Kohat;
who further marked the same to the Judicial Magistrate
and; his alleged confessional statement was recorded on
20.01.2017. The ibid application dated 17.01.2017
available on record of the case nowhere suggests that the
accused intended to record his confessional statement;
rather, he showed his desire to record his statement.
Therefore, the alleged confessional statement could not
be used for his conviction. Moreover, the convict/
appellant subsequently retracted from his confessional

statement and alleged the same to be illegal, recorded
SOECLMET

12

without observing codal formalities i.e. without warning
or opportunity for pondering over his confession. In
order to properly assess intrinsic worth of the said
confessional statement (Ex.PW.5/3) that whether the
same was voluntarily, true and recorded after observance
of due and codal formalities, this Court has thoroughly
perused the same. In reply to Question No.7 “Do you want
to engage the counsel?” the convict/appellant replied that;
“May be but not at present as I have no contact with my
family.” which clearly suggests that no proper
opportunity was provided to the convict/appellant to
contact his family members or to engage his counsel;
thus, the alleged confessional statement is not sufficient

for maintaining the conviction of the appellant.

13. Therefore, in the given circumstances, this Court
has no hesitation in holding that; prosecution has
miserably failed to prove its case against the
convict/appellant beyond reasonable doubt. The
prosecution is under bounden duty not only to establish
through unimpeachable evidence, the recovery of
contraband, its safe transmission from spot to PS for its
safe custody and; further to the Government Analyst for
its chemical examination through an unbroken chain; as
report/result of the Chemical Analyst plays a vital role for

determining the guilt of an accused charged with the
13

offence. Such chain of custody is fundamental as report
of Government Analyst is the main evidence against the
accused and; it is for the Prosecution to establish that
chain of custody unbroken, unsuspicious, safe and
secure. Any break in the ibid chain i.e. safe custody or
safe transmission would impair and vitiate the
conclusiveness and reliability of the Report of
Government Analyst thus rendering it incapable of
sustaining conviction. 2019 SCMR 2004 Zahir Shah
alias Shat..V.The State through Advocate-General,
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, 2018 SCMR 2039 State V.

Imam Bakhsh.

14. Therefore, in the given circumstances, the evidence
so put forth by the prosecution is not only full of
contradictions; but, is also based upon surmises and
conjectures, which has created serious doubts in its case,
therefore, the same could not qualify to be relied upon
qua maintaining conviction and sentence of the
convict/appellant under the safe administration of
justice. Moreover, it is also settled that; whenever a
reasonable doubt occurs in the case of prosecution its
benefit is to be given to the accused, as a matter of right

and not as a grace.

15. The prosecution could not offer any explanation

regarding the said glaring variation much less plausible
14

and justifiable, which indeed has created a serious dent in
its case. As earlier discussed that; where punishment for
an offence charged with is death or life imprisonment, the
evidence adduced by the prosecution before the trial
Court must be of unimpeachable character; howbeit, the

same is not the case here.

9. In view of what has been discussed above, the
instant appeal is accepted and the impugned judgment
dated 18.11.2019 passed by the learned trial Court is
set-aside and; the convict/appellant is acquitted of the
charges leveled against him under Section 9-C CNSA,
1997. He shall be set at liberty forthwith if not required

in any other case.

Announced:

24.9.2020 —_—
E

*Nazir* (DB) — Hon'ble Mr. Justice Lal Jan Kfiattak, J.

Hon'ble Mr. Justice SM Attique Shak, J.
