Judgment Sheet

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, PESHAWAR
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT

Cr. Misc. (BA) No. 197-P/2017
JUDGMENT
Date of hearing..................... 17.3.2017...ccccceceececeeeees
Petitioner (Akbar Said) by Mr. Muhammad Nisar, Advocate
Respondent (The State) by Mr. Rab Nawaz Khan, AAG

Syed Rifaqat Shah, Advocate for the complainant.

1 2 ie 2 2 2g 2c 2 2g 2 2 2c 2 2k 2 2k OK

QAISER RASHID KHAN, J.- The accused/petitioner

seeks bail in case FIR No. 231 dated 20.7.2014
registered under Sections 302/324/148/149 PPC at
Police Station Mandani, with the allegations that he
alongwith his co-accused had fired at the complainant
party with which Fazle Maula son of the complainant
Moambar was hit and died on the spot while the
complainant also received firearm injuries.

Arguments heard and the available
record perused.
2. As per the FIR, it was the complainant
Moambar who in injured condition reported about the
incident in the Civil Hospital Jamalabad as to how
while present at his house with his son Fazle Maula,
he rushed outside on the report of fire shots and there
he saw the accused/petitioner alongwith his co-

accused firing at his son Zakirullah whereafter they
also fired at the complainant and Fazli Maula with
which the latter was hit and died on the spot while the
complainant also received firearm injuries.

3. All that the learned counsel for the
petitioner vehemently argued was that a general role
of firing has been assigned by the complainant to
seven accused and that four co-accused namely Awal
Said, Parvez, Noor Said and Tajy were tried by the
learned Additional Sessions Judge, Charsadda at
Tangi and at the conclusion of the trial were acquitted
and the role of the petitioner is in no way
distinguishable from that of the acquitted accused,
therefore, he is entitled to be enlarged on bail.

4. No doubt, a general role of firing has
been attributed by the complainant to the
accused/petitioner as well as to four acquitted co-
accused and of course to the two absconding co-
accused namely Khan and Ayaz. However, in a
situation where the complainant himself received
firearm injuries, where he made the report with due
promptitude i.e. within the 45 minutes after the
occurrence, where the FSL report shows that 10
empties of 7.62 bore, and 10 crimes empties of 30
bore retrieved from the spot, were fired from different

weapons, showing the involvement of several persons
in the commission of the offence, where the
accused/petitioner preferred to abscond and surfaced
only after the acquittal of his co-accused, then he
cannot press into service such order of acquittal to be
a ground for grant of bail to him as the co-accused
earned their acquittal after facing the rigors of a
protracted trial. The available circumstances prima
facie connect the accused/petitioner with the
commission of the offence which squarely attracts the
prohibitory limb of section 497 Cr.P.C. Thus I hold
the accused/petitioner disentitled to the concession of
bail. Resultantly, this bail petition is dismissed.

Before parting with this order, it is
directed that any observations recorded in this order,
being purely tentative in nature, shall in no way
prejudice the proceedings before the learned trial court
where the case be decided on its own merits after

recording evidence.

JUDGE

Announced
17.3.2017
