Judgment Sheet

PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, MINGORA BENCH/

e

U

DAR UL QAZA, SWAT

JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT

JUDGMENT
Cr.A. No. 246-M/2016.

Date of hearing .... 14.02.2018.
Appellant: (Siraj-ud-Din) by Qazi Farid Ahmad,

Advocate.

Respondents: (the State & I another) by Mr.
Rahim shah, Astt: Advocate General.

MOHAMMAD IBRAHIM KHAN, J-.

This is an appeal under section 410 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure against the verdict
rendered in Special Court Case No. 30/ CNSA
of the year 2016 dated 21.11.2016. The learned
Sessions Judge/Judge Special Court/Zila Qazi
Swat on implication of the accused/Appellant
Siraj-ud-Din in case FIR No. 185 dated
22.02.2016 registered at Police Station Mingora
District Swat convicted and sentenced him under

sections 9 (c) CNSA as under:-

ee

i. Under section 9 (c) CNSA to 3 years
rigorous imprisonment along with fine of
Rs. 30,000/- or in default thereof shall
further suffer 3 months SI. However,
benefit of section 382-B Cr. P.C. was
extended to the accused/Appellant.

Nawab (D.B.) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Mohammad Ibrahim Khan
Hon'ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Nasir Mahfooz
e

1

2. The version of prosecution as
advanced through ‘'Murasila' followed by
lodging of the First Information Report would
reveal that the complainant Salim Khan ASI in
view of prior spy information that
accused/Appellant has been involved in selling
of narcotics on large scale. Therefore, as per
instance of the informer he (complainant) along
with other police party apprehended the accused
at a place of occurrence i.e. known as people
Chowk Mingora. During his personal search, the
police recovered a plastic bag from his right
hand which contained packet, out of which, on
further search 1069 grams Chars were
recovered. The police also recovered sale
proceed of Rs. 9,000/- comprised upon notes of
different denomination. Thereby, out of the

recovered Chars 5 grams were separated for

~ chemical analysis while the rest were sealed into

separate parcel.
3. Thereafter, the learned Sessions Judge
Swat being in the capacity of Judge Special

Nawab (D.B.) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Mohammad Ibrahim Khan
Hon'ble Mr, Justice Muhammad Nasir Mahfooz
Court charge-sheeted the accused/Appellant on
13.05.2016 and when he did not plead his guilt.
The prosecution examined Akhtar Ayub SHO as
PW-1, Mian Sahibullah Madad Muharir as PW-
2, the complainant/Seizing Officer as PW-3,
Asad Constable as PW-4, Sher Bahader ASI as
PW-5, Muhammad Haleem Khan ASHO as PW-
6 and under the statement of Mr. Mujarab Khan
learned Public Prosecutor Swat, evidence of the
prosecution was put to an end.
4. At the end, the accused/Appellant was
examined under section 342 Cr.P.C. He negated
his involvement in this case and _ posed
innocence. After hearing the parties at length the
decision under conviction for the sentences was
delivered.
33 Having heard arguments of learned
counsel for the accused/Appellant and learned
1 aste Advocate General appearing on behalf of
the State, record gone through with their
assistance.
6. Learned counsel for the

accused/Appellant referred to 2008 YLR 1562

Nawab (D.B.) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Mohammad Ibrahim Khan
Hon'ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Nasir Mahfooz
(Lahore) " Muhammad Younis V/S The State"
with particular reference that the Seizing Officer
was below the rank of Sub-Inspector,2004 YLR
1303 _(Lahore)" Muhammad Yasin V/S_The
State on the same analogy and 2016 P Cr. LJ
1234 (Lahore) " Shahid Mehmood V/S_The
State, wherein in view of the contradictory
statements of the recovery memo the then an
accused/Appellant was given the benefit of
doubt by way of his acquittal.
Ts It appears from the record that on the
basis of prior spy information, the
complainant/Seizing Officer by the rank of ASI
along with other police officials apprehended the
accused at the instance of informer and out of
his personal possession recovered Chars 1069
grams along with sale proceed of Rs. 9,000/-.
The very contents of 'Murasila' followed by
lodging of the First Information and even the
od
v~ charge so framed against the accused/appellant
would reveal that the recovery of contraband
Chars was effected in thickly populated area i.e.

‘People Chowk Mingora' and that too in view of

Nawab (D.B.) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Mohammad Ibrahim Khan
Hon'ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Nasir Mahfooz
|
¢

prior spy information. Yet all the prosecution
witnesses are police officials, this Court is also
conscious of the fact that the police officials can
be as good witnesses as compared to private
witnesses and in some cases even can better
present the prosecution version before the
competent Courts of law. But in context of the
present case, the situation is little bit different,
as the alleged recovery has been admittedly
effected from Shahi road then it was boundan
duty of the prosecution to least associate some
private or independent witnesses with the
recovery process in the eventuality when the
police party in general and the Seizing Officer in
particular was aware of the place of occurrence
due to prior spy information.
8. It is also an admitted fact surfacing on
the record that the alleged recovery of
contraband Chars was made by an official of
Police Department below the rank of Sub-
Inspector in violation of Section 21 of the
Control of Narcotic Substances Act, 1997.

Though, in some area this privilege has been

Nawab (D.B.) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Mohammad Ibrahim Khan
Hon'ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Nasir Mahfooz
extended to officials of lower rank, but that
differentiation existed in special parts of the
country like District Chitral where the Scout
officials have been given these powers under the
gazette Notification. But in this part of country
i.e. District Swat, this concession has not yet

been extended. In this regard, reliance has been

placed on 2008 YLR 1562 (Lahore) "

Muhammad __Younis V/S__The State. The

relevant of the ibid judgment speaks of:-

----S5.9(b), 21 & 22---Investigation
conducted by an Assistant Sub-
Inspector of  Pollic---Validity---
Police Officer of the rank of an
A.S.-I. had raided the accused,
recovered the narcotic substance,
prepared the recovery memo. and,
thus, had practically conducted the
entire investigation---Investigations
carried out by an A.S.-I. were
violative of Ss.21 and 22 of the
Control of Narcotic Substances Act
1997, because an officer below the
rank of Sub-Inspector of. Police
could not seize in any public place
and had no authority to search and
arrest a person for recovery of
narcotics---Said proceedings carried

prod out by Assistant Sub-Inspector of

ce police and recovery memos prepared

by him had no legal force and could
not lead to conviction---Prosecution
had failed to prove its case in a.
legal manner---Accused was
acquitted in circumstances.

Nawab (D.B.) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Mohammad Ibrahim Khan
Hon'ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Nasir Mahfooz
oe

Same view has further been affirmed

by the case law cited as 2004 YLR_ 1303

(Lahore) "'" Muhammad Yasin V/S The State",

wherein it has been held:-

----Ss.9(c), 21 & 22---Appreciation of
evidence--- Entire investigation in the case
had been made by Assistant Sub Inspector
of Police who had recovered narcotic
substances, made them into sealed parcels,
prepared their sample sealed parcels and
also drafted its recovery memos. as well the
complaint and also recorded statements of
witnesses who attested recovery memos.---
Validity--- Investigations carried out by
said police officer. were violative of Ss.21
& 22 of Control of Narcotic Substances .
Act; 1997---Officer below the rank of Sub -
Inspector of Police could not seize in any
public place and had no authority to search
and arrest a person for recovery of
narcotics--- Proceedings’ of search, arrest
and recovery, could not be processed or
carried out by Assistant Sub-Inspector of
Police axed recovery memos. prepared by
him carried no legal force and accused on
basis of investigations carried out by said
officer could not be convicted--- Assistant
Sub Inspector of Police having carried out
entire investigation in violation of
mandatory provisions of S.21 of Control of
Narcotic Substances Act, 1997, conviction
and sentences awarded to accused were set
aside and he was acquitted of charge
against him.

9. In case of narcotics primary

importance has been attached to the mode and

yo manner of the alleged recovery of contraband

Chars. In context of the present case, the Seizing
Officer Saleem Khan stated in his cross-
examination that the accused at the time of
alleged recovery on sighting the police did not

Nawab (D.B.) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Mohammad Ibrahim Khan
Hon'ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Nasir Mahfooz
cc

l

try to decamp from the spot, as he could easily
make his presence whisk off from the place of
recovery being thickly populated area. This PW
further deposed during cross-examination that
no test purchase was obtained from accused.
Above all, PW-4 Asad Constable totally negated
the version of prosecution to the effect that the
alleged contraband Chars was recovered from
the pocket of 'Bunyian' (Ob8) of the accused,
whereas it is case of the prosecution that the
recovery of Chars was effected from the packet
wrapped up in the plastic bag held by the
accused at the relevant time in his right hand.

10. Moreover, the samples separated for
chemical analysis of the FSL has been sent to
the concerned Laboratory via receipt No. 168/21
dated 23.02.2016 through Muhammad Hussain

Constable No. 2198, but this important witness

~ has not been examined by the prosecution in

order to further authenticate the veracity of FSL
report which though received in positive to the

effect that the recovered contraband is Chars.

Nawab (D.B.) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Mohammad Ibrahim Khan
Hon'ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Nasir Mahfooz
11. In view of the above discussion, we
are of the firm view that the prosecution failed
to prove its case against the accused/Appellant
beyond any shadow of doubt; therefore, his
conviction cannot be maintained, ergo, while
extending the benefit of doubt, we accept the
appeal filed by the Appellant by setting aside his
conviction and sentence acquit him of the
charges levelled against him. He be set free
forthwith, if not required in any other case. More
so, the seizing officer PW-3 Saleem Khan states
that he weighed the contraband Chars twice but
PW-4 Asad Constable No. 1737 states that in his
presence only once the weighment was carried
out, which further creates doubt as to its
weighment.

12. Last but not the least there are some
glaring discrepancies in the statements of PWs.
Accordingly the accused/Appellant was
apprehended at 09:00 hours whereas, the most
important PW-4 Constable Asad No. 1737
witness to the recovery memo states that they

had come to the place from where the

Nawab (D.B.) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Mohammad Ibrahim Khan
Hon'ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Nasir Mahfooz
accused/Appellant was apprehended, the time
was 09:30 AM, meaning thereby that the exact
time of arrest is still a mystery.

12. Since accused/Appellant has already
been released on bail by this Court within the
meaning of Section 426 Cr.P.C on 19.12.2016,
therefore his sureties are also discharged from

the liability of bail bonds. -
| —

Announced,
Dt. 14.02.2018 e

JUDGE

Nawab (D.B.) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Mohammad Ibrahim Khan
Hon'ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Nasir Mahfooz
