Judgment Sheet
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, ABBOTTABAD BENCH.

JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT

Cr.R.No.24-A/2016.
JUDGMENT
Date of hearing: 17/11/2017
Petitioner (Malik M. Nisar) By Qazi Muhammad Azhar, Advocate
Respondent (State) by Mr. YasirZahoorAbbasi, Assistant AG.
Complainant (Muhammad Ashigq) by Mr. SajjadSarwar, Advocate.

SYED ARSHAD ALL, J:- Petitioner Malik
Muhammad Nisar has filed instant revision petition
under Section 439 Cr.P.C. against the impugned
judgment dated 13.06.2016, passed by learned
Additional Session Judge, Haripur, whereby the
sentence of the petitioner in case FIR No. 581 dated
23.09.2012 of Police Station Kot, under section 337
A(ii) PPC was converted from 3 years imprisonment to
payment of 5 % of Diyat, u/s 337 F(i) and A(i) was
converted from imprisonment of one year to payment of
Arsh of Rs. 10,000/- and Rs. 5000/- to each injured.

2. Brief facts leading to filing of instant
petition are petitioner along with his co-accused
Muhammad Rashid, Mukhtar Elahi, Saeed Akthar

andAamir were charged by the complainant
Muhammad Aashiq for causing injuries to him as well
as to injured PWs Sajid Nawaz and Khyber Zaman and
case FIR No. 581 dated 23.09.2012 under Section 337
A(ii)/34. PPC of Police Station Kot, Haripur was
registered. Upon completion of investigation, the local
police submitted challan under Section 173 Cr.P.C.
against the petitioner and his co-accused for trial before
the Court of learned Judicial Magistrate concerned.
After providing copies to the petitioner and his co-
accused in terms of Section 241-A Cr.P.C. charge was
framed against them, to which they pleaded not guilty
and claimed trial. The prosecution was thus offered
opportunity to lead its evidence. Prosecution produced
as many as 13 PWs against the accused and closed its
evidence. After completion of prosecution evidence, the
statement of petitioner and his co-accused was
recorded. The learned trial Court vide its judgment
dated 04.06.2015 found the petitioner and his co-
accused guilty of offence and resultantly, the petitioner
was convicted under Section 337 A(ii) PPC and
sentenced him to imprisonment for three years as Taz’ ir
along with payment of Arsh equivalent to the value of
Diyat for the head injury and in defauilt of payment of

Arsh, to undergo simple imprisonment till the payment
of Arsh. He was also found guilty of offence under
Section 337 A(i) PPC and sentenced to one year
imprisonment as Taz’ir and to pay Daman of Rs.
10,000/- to each of the injured and in default to undergo
simple imprisonment till payment of Daman. Similarly,
he was also convicted under Section 337 F(i) PPC and
sentenced to imprisonment for one year as Taz’ir and to
pay Daman of Rs. 5000/- to each of the injured or in
default to undergo simple imprisonment till payment of
daman.

3. The petitioner/convict along with his co-
accused filed criminal appeal No. 16/10 of 2015 which
was partially allowed by the learned Additional
Sessions Judge-II, Haripur and the sentence of 03
years of imprisonment awarded under Section 337 A(ii)
PPC was converted to 5% of Diyat, while the sentence
of one year recorded under Section 337 F(i) and A(i)
PPC was converted to payment of Arsh of Rs. 10,000/-
and 5000/- to each injured. Feeling dissatisfied, the
petitioner has filed instant criminal revision petition.

4. Arguments heard and record perused.

5. Perusal of record would divulge that petitioner
is charged for causing injuries to complainant and

injured PWs Sajid Nawaz as well as Khyber Zaman. As
per MLC (Ex PW-11/1), the following injuries were

found on the body of complainant:-

i. Shape (oval) lacerated wound having irregular
margin on right side of skull 09 cm above from
right pinna 2 cm x 1.5 cm x skin deep.

il. Graze mark on back 4 cm x 2 cm x superficial.

iil. Complainant of chest pain.

Injured PW Khyber Zaman, according to his

MLC (Ex PW-11/3) was having a sharp lacerated

irregular wound on frontal region of skull, 6 cm above

from left eyebrow, 4.5 cm x 3.5 cm x bone exposed.

While injured PW Sajid Nawaz according to MLC (Ex

PW-11/5) was having the following injuries:-

i. O shape lacerated wound above left eyebrow

measuring 2 cm x 2 cm x skin deep.

ii. Abrasion mark on lateral aspect of left hand 2 cm

x 2 cm x superficial.

iii. | Abrasion on back in inter-scapular region.

6. The present petitioner was shown to be

armed with axe and inflicting its blows to complainant

and both the injured PWs. The stance set out in the FIR
was fully supported by both the injured PWs namely

Khyber Zaman and Sajid Nawaz (PW-3 and PW-4), the

two eyewitnesses namely Mumtaz Ahmed and Ghulam
Yazdan (PW-5 and PW-6), the investigating officer
PW-8 and the medical officer PW-11. The said
witnesses were subjected to lengthy cross examination
but nothing favourable to accused/petitioner could be
extracted from them. The complainant, injured PWs
and the eyewitnesses remained consistent in their
deposition and their testimony could not be shattered.
The stance of the complainant was further strengthened
by the medico-legal reports as well as recovery of blood
stained garments of the complainant and that of injured
PWs.

7. It was argued by the learned counsel
appearing on behalf of the petitioner that in the initial
report, recorded vide Mad No. 8 dated 23.09.2012, axe
was mentioned by the complainant as weapon of
offence, however, after receipt of medical reports, when
no injury on the person of complainant or injured PWs
was found to be with sharp edged weapon, the
complainant changed his stance and stated that the
injuries were inflicted with back side of the axe, thus
improved his earlier stance, causing doubt in the
prosecution case. No doubt in the initial report, the
complainant has not specifically mentioned that injuries

were caused by the present petitioner with back side of
the axe, however, it is very much settled that the first
information report is not an encyclopedia, containing
each and every detail of the occurrence, rather it is sort
of information, to put the machinery of law into motion.
Thus non specifying the fact that the injuries were
caused with the back side of the axe in the initial report
and later on clarifying this fact, cannot be termed as
improvement.

8. Now coming to the conviction and
sentence passed by the Courts below, the learned trial
Court convicted the petitioner under Section 337-A(ii)
PPC to undergo imprisonment for three years and to
pay Arsh equivalent to the value of Diyat, under
Section 337-A(i) PPC to undergo imprisonment for one
year and to pay Damman of Rs. 10,000/- to each of the
injured and under Section 337-F(i) PPC to undergo
imprisonment of one year and to pay Daman of Rs.
5000/- to each of the injured PWs. In appeal the learned
appellate court converted the aforementioned
conviction and sentence to payment of Arsh under
Section 337-A(ii) PPC and Damman under Section 337
A(i) and 337 F(i) PPC to each of the injured PW,

however, both the Courts below have failed to
appreciate the evidence as to who out of the injured
PWs sustained what type of injury.

9. According to the MLC of complainant Ashiq,
he was having a skin deep lacerated wound having
irregular margins on right side of skull which falls
under the definition of Shajjah-i-Khafifah punishable
under Section 337-A(i) PPC. The punishment provided
for the offence under Section 337-A(i) PPC is daman
and imprisonment which may extend to two years as
Ta’zir. Similarly, injured PW Sajid Nawaz, according
to his MLC was having a lacerated wound on left eye
brow which was skin deep also falling within the
definition of Shajjah-i-Khafifahpunishable under
Section 337-A(i) PPC and an abrasion on lateral aspect
of hand which was a superficial injury falling within the
definition of Damiyah punishable under Section 337-
F(i) PPC and the punishment provided for the
Damiyahis Damman and may also be punished with
imprisonment up to one year as Ta’zir. Only Khyber
Zaman injured, according to his MLC was having a
lacerated wound on frontal region of skull which
exposed the bone, falling within the definition of
Shajjah-i-Mudihah punishable under Section 337 A(ii)

PPC to Qisas or Arsh which shall be five percent of
Diyat and may also be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extent to five
years as ta’zir. Thus only injured PW Khyber Zaman
was entitled to receive Arsh equal to 5% of Diyat, while
complainant Ashiq and injured PW Sajid Zaman were
entitled to receive Damman, keeping in view the
injuries on their person.

10. In view of the above, while partially
allowing petition in hand, the petitioner is directed to
pay Arsh equal to five percent of Diyatunder Section
337-A(ii) PPC (Rs. 126603/-) to the injured PW Khyber
Zaman, while to pay Daman under Section 337-A(i)
PPC to complainant Muhammad Ashiq and injured PW
Sajid Nawaz (Rs. 10,000/- each) and Daman under
Section 337 F(i) PPC to injured PW Sajid Zaman
amounting to Rs. 5000/-.

11. The convict/petitioner shall pay the
aforesaid amount of Arshand Daman within two
months. Till then he shall remain on bail against already
submitted surety bonds. However, if he fails to pay the
amount within the aforesaid period, his bail granting
order shall stand recalled, he shall be taken into custody
and shall remain in imprisonment till the payment of

aforesaid amount.
Announced. JUDGE
Dt.17.11.2017.

/Aftab P.S*/ Justice Syed Arshad Ali.
