( )

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,

Cr, A No.242-P/2020

Shah Nawaz son of Dad Khan,
1/o Balarzai Badh Ber Peshawar.

Appellant (s)
VERSUS

The State
Respondent (s)
For Appellant (s) :- Mr. Shahab Khattak, Advocate.

For State - Ms. Sophia Noreen, AAG.
Date of hearing: 13.12.2022

JUDGMENT

ROOH-UL-AMIN KHAN, _J:- This criminal appeal under Section
48 Control of Narcotic Substances Act, 1997 (“Act of 1997”), filed
by Shah Nawaz, the appellant, is directed against the judgment
dated 22.02.2020, passed by learned Sessions Judge/Judge Special
Court, Peshawar, whereby he has convicted the appellant under
section 9 (c ) of the Act of 1997 and sentenced him to undergo
imprisonment for life and to pay a fine of Rs.3,00,000/- or in
default thereof to further undergo one year simple imprisonment,
vide case FIR No.1297 dated 19.09.2015, registered under Section
9 (c ) of the Act of 1997 at Police Station Hayatabad, Peshawar.

2. The prosecution’s case as unfolded in the First
Information Report (“FIR”) Exh.PA is that on 19.09.2015 at 1430
hours, Shakeel Khan ASI (PW.4) along with other police officials
during Nakabandi at Jamroad, intercepted an Alto Motorcar bearing

registration No.LZN.4086, driven by Shah Nawaz Khan, the
wl

appellant, and recovered 15 packets of chars Pukhta, each weighing
01 Kilogram, total 15 Kilograms, from secret cavities made beneath
the driver’s and front seats. He separated 05 grams from each
packet as samples for chemical analysis by the FSL and sealed the
same into parcels No.1 to 15. He also sealed the remaining quantity
into a separate parcel No.16 and thereafter took the same into
possession along with the motorcar vide recovery memo
Exh.PW.2/1. He issued arrest card of the appellant, drafted
Murasila Exh.PA on the basis of which FIR Exh.PA was registered
against the appellant. One Hakeem Ullah was also made as accused
in light of police statement of the appellant, who allegedly was
owner of the recovered contraband narcotics.

3. On completion of investigation challan was submitted
against the appellant before the learned trial Court, where he was
formally charge sheeted to which he pleaded not guilty and claimed
trial. To prove its case, the prosecution examined as many as six
witnesses. After closure of the prosecution evidence, statement of
the appellant was recorded under section 342 Cr.P.C., wherein he
denied the prosecution’s allegation and professed his innocence.
He, however, neither wished to be examined on oath or to produce
evidence in defence. On conclusion of trial, the learned trial Court,
after hearing both the sides convicted and sentenced the appellant
under section 9 (c) of the Act of 1997 to undergo ten years rigorous
imprisonment vide judgment dated 14.04.2018, against which the
appellant filed Cr.A. No.72-P of 2019, which was disposed off by

this court in the terms that impugned judgment was set aside on the
/

ground of sentence awarded to the appellant being not in
accordance with the provisions of section 9 (c ) of the Act of 1997
and consequently, the case was remanded to the learned trial court
for re-writing judgment as well as re-appreciating the evidence on
record vide judgment dated 05.11.2019.

4. On receipt of record after remand, the learned trial court
after hearing both the sides has convicted and sentenced the
appellant as mentioned in the initial paragraph of this judgment,
hence, this appeal.

5. We have heard the arguments of learned counsel for the
parties and perused their record and evidence with their able
assistance.

6. It appears from record that incident in this case has taken
place on 19.09.2015 at 1510 hours. Shakeel Khan ASI Seizing
Officer while appearing as PW.1 in his examination-in-chief
reiterated the same story of arrest of the appellant and recovery of
contraband narcotics from secret cavities made in motorcar driven
by the appellant at the relevant time as well as the proceedings
conducted by him at the spot, which has already been referred in the
earlier part of this judgment, therefore, his examination-in-chief is
not referred again. In cross-examination he stated that the
occurrence has taken place at Jamroud Chowki where they had
conducted Nakabandi, however, he could not produce daily diary
maintained in the said Check Post. He stated that he had not
recovered CNIC or other documents from the appellant regarding

his identity. In the next breath he admitted that he has mentioned
e/

o

CNIC and mobile number of the accused in the Murasila. He also
admitted that application to the FSL regarding chemical analysis of
the samples is not available on file. He further stated that he sent
the Murasila Exh.PA/1 to the Police Station through Constable
Sardar. Contrary, constable Sardar Ali while appearing as PW.2 has
not stated a single word about taking of Murasila from the Spot to
the Police Station or taking samples and case property to the Police
Station rather he has deposed that he is marginal witness to
recovery. memo Exh.PW.2/1 vide which the seizing Officer took
into possession Alto Motorcar bearing Registration No.LZN 4086
and 15 packets of chars in his presence. In cross-examination he has
totally shattered the prosecution's case by deposing that the moment
he was signing the recovery memo Exh.PW.2/1, FIR number, date
and Police Station as well as section of law were mentioned in the
recovery memo. Contradicting the statement of the Seizing Officer,
PW.2 further stated that they had made entry in daily diary on the
day of occurrence. He stated that as the Check post was permanent
therefore they remained there till 9.00 P.M. Shakeel Khan ASI,
Seizing Officer (PW.4) has not stated a single word as to how and
through whom the samples in parcels No.1 to 15 were sent to the
Police Station from the spot and thereafter its onward transmission
to the FSL. Similarly, his testimony is also silent about parcel
No.16 containing case property that to whom the same was handed
over by him. Contrary, Imran Habib Khan ASI (PW.5) deposed that
on the basis of Murasila he registered FIR Exh.PA and Shakeel

Khan ASI handed over him parcels No.1 to 15 for sending the same
5

for sending the same to the FSL and parcel No.16 for keeping the
same into Malkhana in the Police Station. In cross-examination he
stated that his statement was not recorded by the Investigating
Officer under section 161 Cr.P.C. regarding receiving of parcels on
the eventful day, rather the same was recorded on 15.10.2015. It is
manifest from record that the samples have been sent to the FSL on
28.09.2015 through constable Mustafa. The extract of Register
No.19 has alsonot been exhibited during trial. Haji Rehman SI
(PW.6), who has conducted investigation in the case in cross-
examination has stated that he examined the recovered contraband
narcotics in Police Station, after his return from the spot. He also
admitted that application to the FSL with regard to samples is not
available on file. He further admitted it correct that up to
28.09.2015, the samples were in the custody of Moharrir of Police
Station. Constable Mustafa Khan PW.1, in cross-examination has
admitted that he had taken the samples to the FSL on 28.09.2015
i.e. after a delay of about 9 days for which no explanation, much
less plausible has been furnished by the prosecution. Similarly, as
application to FSL is not available on file, therefore, it is uncertain
that when the samples were handed over to Constable Mustafa for
' its onward transmission to the FSL.

eo 7. The contradictions in the testimony of the prosecution’s
P| witnesses referred above create serious doubts in the prosecution’s
case. Similarly, the chain of safe custody of samples from the spot

till its receipt in the FSL also remained unproved. In the judgment
reported as (2018 SCMR 2039), the Hon’ble Supreme Court has
held that:-

po

“Chain of custody began with the recovery of the sized
drug by the police and included the separation of the
representative sample(s) of the seized drug and their
dispatch to the Narcotics Testing Laboratory. Said chain
of custody was pivotal as the entire construct of the
Control of Narcotic Substance Act, 1997 and the Control
of Narcotic Substances (Government Analysts) Rules,
2001 rested on the report of the Government analyst,
which in turn rested on the process of sampling and its
safe and secure custody and transmission to the
Laboratory. Representative samples of the alleged drug
must be in safe custody and undergo safe transmission
from the stage of recovery till it is received at the
Narcotics Testing Laboratory. Prosecution must establish
that the chain of custody was unbroken, unsuspicious,
indubitable, safe and secure. Any break in the chain of
custody or lapse in the control of possession of the sample,
would cast doubts on the safe custody and safe
transmission of the samples(s) and would impair and
Yitiate the conclusiveness and reliability of the report
of the Government Analyst, thus, rendering _it

incapable__of sustaining conviction. (emphasis
supplied).
8. In case titled, “Abdul Ghani and others vs the State

and others” (PLJ 2019 SC (Cr.C) 462) the Hon’ble supreme
Court, without discussing the merits of the case, on the sole
ground of missing chain of safe transmission of the samples from
the spot till receipt in the FSL and non-production of the relevant
witnesses in whose custody the samples remained, allowed the
appeal and acquitted the convicts/appellant by setting aside the

concurrent findings of the two courts below.
9. Besides, the occurrence has taken place on 19.09.2015
whereas, the samples have been sent to the FSL on 28.09.2015.
The prosecution has not furnished any explanation much less
plausible with regard to the delay. As stated earlier, application to
the FSL with regard to samples is also not available. This aspect
also creates serious doubt in the prosecution’s case. Similarly,
the FSL report Exh.PZ reveals that Chemical Examiner has not
specified protocols of the test applied to each sample which was
the mandatory requirement under Rule 6 of the Government
Analysts) Rules, 2001. In judgment dated 18.12.2019, rendered
in case titled, Qaiser Javed Khan vs the State through Prosecutor
General Punjab Lahore and another” the Hon’ble apex Court has

held that:-

“The report of the Government Analyst in the instant cases
does not specify the protocols of the tests applied and thus
does not meet the requirements of the law as interpreted by
this Court in the cases of Imam Bakhsh and Khair ul Bashar
(supra). The said Report cannot be relied upon for conviction
of the petitioner. Therefore, the petition is converted into
appeal and allowed. The conviction and sentence of the
petitioner are set aside. He shall be released forth if not
required to be detained in any other case”.
10. The prosecution’s case suffers from the same legal

defects as highlighted by the Hon’ble apex Court in the
judgments (supra), therefore, this appeal is allowed. Conviction
and sentence of the appellant recorded by the learned trial Court
through impugned judgment are hereby set-aside and he is
acquitted of the charge leveled against him. He be set at liberty

forthwith, if not detained in any other case.
11. These are the reasons of our short order of even date,
which is reproduced below:-

“For reasons to be recorded later, we allow this appeal,
set-aside the conviction and sentence of appellant Shah
Nawaz, recorded under section 9 (c ) Control of
Narcotic Substances Act, 1997, by learned trial
Court/Judge Special Court, Peshawar vide judgment
dated 22.02.2020, in case FIR No.1297 dated
19.09.2015, registered under section 9 (c ) CNS Act,
1997, at Police Station Hayatabad, Peshawar and
hereby acquit him from the charge leveled against him
in the cited case. The appellant be set at liberty
forthwith, if not confined in any other case.
Announced: ‘
73.12.2022 po pes

M.Siraj Afridi CS
Senior Puisne Judge

oo)
JUDGE
DB of Mr, Justice Rooh ul Amin Khan Hon’ ble Senior Puisne Judge;

ind Hon’ r.Jus ed A. Ali
