JUDGMENT SHEET

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
BANNU BENCH
(Judicial Department)

Cr.M.BA. No.150-B/2018,
Ijaz Muhammad alias Ijaz Khan
Vs.
The State, etc.
JUDGMENT
For Petitioner: 77+ Liagak FFG’ kha. avet
For Respondents: (64. 44 “LQ uwWatstMlas, Jhn,

~Fanclepie Hts tee Ltn Gz troll Lelif kien

Date of hearing: 10.01.2019

RREKE

SHAKEEL AHMAD, J.-_ The petitioner, who is at
present in judicial custody, is charged under sections
302/324/148/149 PPC for the double murder of Shehr
Yar and Haider Ali and for having attempted on the life
of complainant. In order to secure bail for himself on the
ground of ailment and infirmity within the meaning of
1* proviso to section 497, Cr.P.C, he first applied to the
Additional Sessions Judge-IV, Bannu, but his
application was dismissed, hence this petition. °

2. The allegation against the petitioner as set-
forth in the crime report, is that he alongwith his co-
accused had made indiscriminate firing on account of

which the brothers of the complainant namely Shehr Yar
-2-

and Haider Ali succumbed to their injuries while the
complainant escaped unhurt, luckily. The petitioner,
after commission of offence, had fled away from the
scene of crime.

3. Earlier, prayer of the petitioner for his
examination by the standing medical board was acceded
to by the Court below. On 15.02.2018, he was examined
by the board and submitted its report, wherein it was

opined that petitioner is suffering from following

ailment:-
1. Hypertension.
2. Diabetes millitis.
3 Burning feets due to diabetics
neuropathy.
4. Back-ache due to disc bulge at L4-
LS.
5. Eye: Bilateral cataracts. Diabetic
maculopathy disc Pallor needs
Vetreo Retinal Suregon opinion
needs treatment.
3. Vide order dated 22.6.2018, this Court

‘again referred the petitioner to standing medical board to
clarify whether he cannot be treated in the jail and he
needs specialized treatment outside the jail. Subsequent
report of the standing medical board dated 07.11.2018,
was received with the following opinion.

“Standing Medical Board is of the
opinion that has MRI Brain, according to
Radiologist report shows prominent
internal and external cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF) spaces prominent ventricular .
system. He is having mild brain atophy
with ischemic changes keeping in. view
his clinical condition and radiological he

scanty,

-3-

should be managed in a tertiary care
hospital”.

4. It is true that in all the said reports,
petitioner is said to be suffering from some ailment and
he is in need of the treatment in a tertiary care hospital,
however, the board has not opined that the ailment from
which petitioner is suffering, is likely to have hazardous
effects on his life and his health would be deteriorated if
remained inside the jail. After going through the reports,
I am satisfied that the petitioner can get proper treatment
for the diseases, which are easily amenable to him in the
tertiary care hospital at Bannu as an under-trial prisoner.

5. The petition is, therefore, dismissed. I,
however, observe that if the petitioner is in need of any
specialized treatment in the tertiary care hospital, it
would be burden of the jail authorities to provide the

same subject of course to the jail rules relating to that

subject.

Announced.

Dt: 10.01.2019 Az)
Kifayat/* JUDGE

(S.B)
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad

