w

Judgment Sheet
PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, BANNU BENCH
(Judicial Department)

Cr, A No.156-B of 2021
Umar Hayat
Vs.
The State etc
JUDGMENT
For appellant: Mr. Sawal Nazir Khan Advocate
For State: Mr. Sardar Muhammad Asif, Asstt; A.G

For Respondents: Mr. Irfan Pirzada Advocate

Date of hearing: 04.04.2022

SAHIBZADA ASADULLAH, J.- The appellant; Umar

Hayat has called in question the judgment dated 28.09.2021,
rendered by learned Additional Sessions Judge-III, Bannu,
whereby the appellant was convicted under section 302(c)
P.P.C. and sentenced to imprisonment for 25 years as Ta’zir
with fine of Rs.2,00,000/- (two lac) as compensation to the
legal heirs of the deceased in terms of section 544-A Cr.P.C,
or in default thereof to further undergo six months simple
imprisonment. Benefit of section 382-B Cr.P.C was extended
in favour of convict/appellant.

2. The complainant, Muhammad Niaz Khan
moved criminal revision petition No.03-B/2022 for
enhancement of sentence of convict/appellant. Since both the

matters have arisen out of one and the same judgment,
-2-
therefore, we intend to decide the same through this common
judgment.

3. Brief facts of the case as per contents of F.LR
are that, on 18.01.2018 at 23:40 hours at civil hospital,
Bannu, the complainant Muhammad Niaz Khan alongwith
dead-body of his deceased brother Zia Ullah, reported the
matter to the local police to the effect that his deceased
brother Zia Ullah had given loan of Rs.700,000/- (seven lac)
to one Aman Ullah of village Fazal Shah Mita Khel as the
said Aman Ullah was laboring in Saudi Arabia, who used to
send the loan amount through co-accused Haroon Khan; that
on the eventful day, the brother of complainant was informed
by the co-accused Haroon Khan to receive the loan amount
sent by Aman Ullah from abroad, when the complainant
alongwith his brother Fahim Ullah on one bike, whereas, Zia
Ullah (deceased) on another bike proceeded to the village
Fazal Shah Mita Khel, where on reaching near the tube well
situated near the house of Abdur Rahim, there co-accused
Haroon Khan, Ayaz & Zaheer Khan duly armed with
Kalashnikovs were already present there where the co-
accused Haroon Khan was bent upon paying Rs.2,00,000/-
less than the actual loan amount to Zia Ullah, upon this an
oral brawl took place between the parties. On their way back,
the complainant alongwith his brother Faheem Ullah on his

bike, while Zia Ullah on his own motorcycle, the accused
-3-

persons started firing at them with intention to kill, as a result
of which brother of the complainant Zia Ullah got hit and
succumbed to the injuries on the spot while the complainant
and his brother Faheem Ullah remained unhurt luckily.
Accused decamped from the spot after commission of the
offence. Motive for the occurrence was stated to be a money
dispute. Hence, the instant F.I.R.

4. After completion of investigation and_ their
arrest, prosecution submitted challan against all the accused.
Learned trial Court after complying codal formalities of
section 265-C Cr.P.C, formally charge sheeted the accused to
which they pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. It is
pertinent to mention that co-accused Ayaz Khan was
juvenile, however, prosecution submitted challan against him
under the relevant law and during trial, co-accused Zaheer &
Haroon and juvenile co-accused Ayaz Khan submitted their
applications for their acquittal u/s 265-K Cr.PC, which were
accepted and they were acquitted of the charges vide Order
dated 12.11.2019. Thereafter, at the commencement of trial
of accused/appellant, the prosecution produced and examined
as many as 11 witnesses. On close of prosecution evidence
statement of accused was recorded under section 342 Cr.P.C,
wherein he professed innocence and false implication,
however, neither he opted to be examined on oath as

provided under section 340(2) Cr.P.C, nor wished to produce

-4-

defence evidence. After hearing arguments, the learned trial
Court vide impugned judgment dated 28.09.2021, and
sentenced the accused/appellant as mentioned above, hence,
the instant appeal against the judgment of conviction as well

as connected Cr.R No.03-B of 2022.

5. We have heard learned counsel for the parties
alongwith learned A.A.G for the State at length and with their

valuable assistance, the record was gone through.

6. The unfortunate incident occurred on
18.01.2018, when the deceased was done to death and three
accused namely, (1) Haroon Khan son of Abdur Rahim (2)
Ayaz son of unknown and (3) Zaheer Khan were charged for
the offence. The dead body was shifted to the local police
station, where the matter was reported, the injury sheet and
inquest report were prepared and after doing the needful the
dead body was sent to the doctor for postmortem
examination.

7. The investigating officer after getting copy of the
F.LR, visited the spot and prepared the site-plan on
pointation of the witnesses. The investigating officer
collected 12 empties of 7.62 bore from the place of the
deceased and the same were sent to the Forensic Science

Laboratory to ascertain as to whether those were fired from
-5-

one or different weapons. It is essential to note that the same
were received to laboratory on 22.01.2018, where those were
found to have been fired from different weapons. It is
pertinent to mention that all the three accused who were
charged by the complainant in his first information report
faced the trial, where the complainant and others expressed
their satisfaction regarding their innocence and as such they
were acquitted of the charges.

8. It is interesting to note that right from beginning
till 29.01.2018, there was nothing on record regarding the
involvement the appellant in the episode, but it was on
29.01.2018 when one Malik Naeem informed the local police
regarding the involvement of the appellant in the incident.
The local police attracted to the spot and _ the
convict/appellant was handed over by the said Malik Naeem
along with a Kalashnikov. After the physical remand was
sought, the appellant was interrogated and ultimately was
produced before the judicial magistrate to record his
confessional statement. It was on 30.01.2018, when the
appellant confessed his guilt. It is pertinent to mention that at
the time of his arrest, a Kalashnikov was allegedly recovered
which was sent to the fire-arm expert along with the
collected empties and a report was received in positive

stating therein that out of 12 empties collected from the spot
-6-

05 matched with the recovered weapon. A separate F.I.R was
registered U/S. 15 AA.

9. The appellant was charge sheeted and on
conclusion of the trial was convicted vide the impugned
judgment.

10. The learned trial court applied judicial mind to the
collected evidence on file and through a comprehensive
judgment convicted the appellant which has been questioned
before this Court. Though the learned trial court dealt with
the material aspects of the case and assessed the collective
evidence, but this being the court of appeal is under
obligation to reassess the already assessed evidence so that
miscarriage of justice could be avoided.

11. The moot questions for determination are, as to
whether the incident occurred in the mode, manner and at the
stated time; and as to whether the accused volunteered his
arrest and that he happily accepted his guilt and as to whether
the prosecution succeeded in bringing home guilt against the
appellant.

12. We are to assess as to whether the incident
occurred in the manner given by the complainant in his first
information report or in the manner narrated by the appellant
in his confessional statement. We are to see as to whether in
case of disbelieving the first information report, the

confessional statement will still hold ground, or as to whether
-7-

when the witnesses were disbelieved on one particular aspect
of the case then the building erected on the sole statement of
the appellant will collapse. There is no denial to the fact that
soon after the arrest of accused charged in F.I-R, they were
put to trial and when the complainant appeared before the
trial court, he expressed his satisfaction regarding their
innocence and as such they were acquitted of the charges.
Soon after their acquittal, it was the appellant who fell into
the hands of one Malik Naeem, who happens to be the real
uncle of the acquitted accused Haroon Khan. The record tells
that it was on his information that the local police attracted to
his Hujra and the appellant along with the Kalashnikov was
handed over to him.

13. True, that soon after his arrest, the appellant was
produced before the court of judicial magistrate, where he
confessed his guilt, but equally true that the prosecution is
still to explain that how he was implicated and arrested in the
instant case. It is important to read Naqal Mad No.18 dated
29.01.2018, where the local police categorically explained
the way Malik Naeem provided information, the way the
appellant was arrested and the manner in which the
Kalashnikov in question was taken into possession. This
Court is to see, as to whether the prosecution succeeded
through independent witnesses in establishing the arrest of

the appellant and his subsequent confession before the court
-8-

of Judicial Magistrate. This is interesting to note that neither
the investigating officer examined Malik Naeem on this
particular aspect of the case, nor he was produced before the
trial court in support of his claim. The foremost duty of the
prosecution was to establish on record the manner in which
the appellant was arrested and the recovery was effected, but
admittedly, the most important witness, i.e, Malik Naeem
was not produced and his non-production cannot be read in
benefit of the prosecution, rather it benefits the appellant.
Article 129(g) of the Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984, caters
for the situation.

14, This is admitted on record that Malik Naeem
happens to be the real uncle of acquitted accused Haroon
Khan and the possibility cannot be excluded that to save his
real nephew the appellant was made escape goat. We are to
access as to whether the confessional statement was
voluntary made; and as to whether the accused was under the
influence of the said Malik Naeem and as to whether the
learned judicial magistrate provided comfort to the appellant
to think. The record tells that there is no other evidence
regarding the involvement of the appellant, but only the so-
called DD No.18 dated 29.01.2018, and the same could not
be proved on record as the very witness who was
instrumental in production of the appellant to the local

police, was not produced. This is unfortunate on part of the
-9-

Investigating Officer, more particularly in this case that the
fate of the appellant was determined on the influence of his
employer, without realizing the fact that in case of conviction
the appellant would be awarded capital punishment. The
Investigating Officer did not realize the interest of Malik
Naeem as he happens to be the real uncle of the acquitted co-
accused Haroon Khan. This practice on part of the police
officials if encouraged would yield into drastic results and in
such eventuality the influence of the influential people would
increase, which in turn would spoil the atmosphere and there
would be every likelihood of miscarriage of justice. It is high
time that such interference must be discouraged, so that the
accused charged would get an opportunity to be treated in
accordance with law and the law enforcement agency would
be at liberty to collect evidence against the accused charged,
in a transparent manner. As in case in hand the urging factor
behind the charge and confession of the appellant was only
and only his employer, so this court is under the obligation to
adjudge as to whether his influence was not sufficient
enough to declare his confessional statement as involuntarily
made. The attending circumstances of the present case lead
this Court to hold that right from his arrest till the end, the
appellant travelled under the influence of his employer i.e.
Malik Naeem and the possibility cannot be excluded that it

was his influence and inducement which compelled the
-10-

appellant to confess his guilt. We are not in a happy mood to
accept the only confessional statement of the appellant for
his conviction, that too, uncorroborated. When such is the
state of affairs no sanctity can be awarded to the recorded
statement and the learned trial Judge fell in error to consider
the same.

15. There is no denial to the fact, that the appellant
was produced before the court of judicial magistrate. But the
prosecution is yet to answer as to whether the incident
occurred in the mode manner and at the stated time. This
court is to resolve that once the first information report was
disbelieved and the witnesses did not support the charge in
the manner it was laid, whether in that eventuality the only
confessional statement of the appellant would be sufficient
for awarding conviction. It transpires from the record, that
soon the case was put in court against the acquitted charged
accused, a compromise was reached between the parties
where special Oath was administered to all the three accused
and the complainant after getting satisfied did not proceed
with the matter. The learned counsel representing the
complainant submitted that it was the choice of the
complainant to withdraw from the charge against some of
accused and to proceed against some, but we are not
persuaded with what was submitted at the bar, as in the

instant case, while reporting the matter, the complainant and
-11-

another posed themselves to be the eye-witnesses of the
incident against the acquitted accused, but when they
accepted the explanation regarding innocence of accused
then no ambiguity is left that the incident did not occur in the
manner as was given in the first information report. When
the witnesses lost their credibility and the accused were
acquitted of the charges then we are afraid that the same
cannot be taken into account against the appellant.

16. The prosecution is left with the only confessional
statement of the appellant and we are to see as to whether the
learned judicial magistrate followed the law on the subject
and that the provided guide lines were strictly observed. We
are to see as to whether the confession was made voluntary
and as to whether the appellant was free from the outside
influence while confessing his guilt. The manner in which
the appellant was arrested and the recovery was effected is
sufficient to hold that he was under the influence of one
Malik Naeem, being his servant. The confessional statement
was read thoroughly, which does not find support from
record of the case. If we admit that the deceased was done to
death in the manner as given by the appellant then in that
eventuality the F.S.L report in respect of the empties would
have been in positive, but in fact only 5 empties were shown
to have been fired from the weapon recovered from his

possession. Though, the Daily Diary No. 18 was drafted by
-12-

the police officials to whom the accused was handed over,
with a compressive detail regarding the involvement of the
appellant in the episode, but as the information was provided
by Malik Naeem and he was not produced before the trial
court, so the prosecution could not succeed to establish that
particular aspect of the case. The confessional statement was
not recorded in an atmosphere which could persuade us that
the appellant by the time was composed and in comfort. The
judicial magistrate was produced as PW-7, who stated that on
30.01.2018, the appellant was produced by the local police
who was given ample opportunity to think and after getting
satisfaction he recorded his confessional statement, though
no major contradictions could be extracted from the mouth of
this witness, but the attending circumstances of the case right
from arrest of the appellant and his production before the
court of judicial magistrate leaves no ambiguity that he was
under an influence of the person who handed him over to the
local police and with whom he was employed as a private
servant. Even otherwise when the complainant of the instant
case could not inspire confidence in respect of acquitted co-
accused, then the manner in which the deceased lost his life
cannot be taken into account and even the sole confessional
statement of the appellant cannot be taken a determining
factor to determine his fate. The appellant did not travel in an

atmosphere of peace and serenity, so the disturbance of his
-13-

mind and influence of his master is a factor which goes
against the prosecution and as such this piece of evidence

cannot be taken into consideration. In case titled, “Mst.

Tasleem and another Vs. State (2013 MLD 1331), it is held
that:

“We are in agreement with learned
counsel for the State that any lapse on
the part of Magistrate in recording
confession cannot always be treated as
fatal to the evidentiary value of
confession but it is to be evident that the
said lapse has not in any way adversely
affected the voluntariness or truthfulness-
of the confession. Thus it is quite safe to
Say that emphasis is upon voluntariness
and truthfulness of the confession which
has to be gathered/collected from the
responses/answers given by the confessor
to mandatory questions. Once it is found
that confessor was subjected to
maltreatment before production for
confession or where confessor states that
he/she is making confession due to
compulsion of some body else, the
confession cannot be taken as voluntary
or truthful."
17, It was stressed time and again that not only the

confessional statement of the appellant brought him
conviction; rather the same was corroborated by the recovery
of weapon from possession of the appellant and its positive
report. As it is evident from record that the appellant was

arrested and handed-over to the local police by real uncle of
-14-

the acquitted accused Haroon Khan, so the recovery effected
is not free from doubt and the same cannot be taken into
consideration. True that the collected empties were sent to
the fire arms expert along with the recovered Kalashnikov,
but as the recovery was not effected from exclusive
possession of the appellant and that the same was handed
over by Malik Naeem, so the same cannot be relied upon and
there is every possibility that the same was planted. As the
said witness was not produced as a witness before the trial
court, so this piece of evidence cannot be taken into
consideration, what to say, to convict the appellant with its
aid, as such the benefit of doubt, if accrues would be

extended to the accused. In case titled, “Attaullah Vs the

State” (PLD 2019 Balochistan 75), it is held that:

“The prosecution has also failed to
establish the recovery of crime weapon,
and proved that the disclosure as well as
the confessional statement of the
appellant was volunteer and true, all
these facts and legal defects have badly
damaged the case of prosecution. The
prosecution is duty bound to prove its
case beyond any reasonable doubt and if
any single and slightest doubt is created,
benefit of the same must go to the
accused and it would be sufficient to
disbelieve the prosecution story and
acquit the accused. Reliance in this

regard is placed on the case of Tariq
-15-

Pervaiz v. The State 1995 SCMR 1345,
wherein the Hon'ble Supreme Court has
held that, "The concept of benefit of
doubt to an accused is deep-rooted in our
country. For giving him benefit of doubt
it is not necessary that there should be
many circumstances creating doubt if
there is a circumstance which creates
reasonable doubt in a prudent mind
about the guilt of the accused then
accused will be entitled to the benefit not
as a matter of grace and concession but
as a matter of right."

18. The prosecution could not succeed in proving the
alleged motive and even no independent witness was
produced in that respect, so the same cannot be taken into
consideration. Even the complainant while reporting the
matter did not charge the appellant for the murder of the
deceased and even no motive against the appellant was
brought on record. True that weakness or absence of motive
is not sufficient to dislodge the prosecution case, but equally
true that once motive is alleged the prosecution is under the
bounden duty to prove the same, failing which, non-else but
the prosecution would suffer.

19. The cumulative effect of what has been stated
above leads this court to an irresistible conclusion that the
prosecution failed in bringing home guilt against the
appellant and that the impugned judgment is suffering from

inherent defects which calls for interference. The learned trial
0.7 APR 272

-16-

Judge, misdirected himself both in law as well as on facts of
the case. The instant criminal appeal is, therefore, allowed,
the impugned judgment is set-aside. The appellant is
acquitted of the charges, he shall be released forthwith, if not
required to be detained in connection with any other criminal
case.

20. As the Criminal Appeal against conviction has
succeeded, so the connected Criminal Revision bearing No.
03-B/2022 has lost its utility to proceed, the same being
bereft of merit is hereby dismissed.

Announced
04.04.2022

*Imranullah PS*

{0.8}
Hon'ble Mr. Justice ishtiaq Ibrahim &
Hon'ble Mr. Justice Sahibzada Asaduliah
