Judgment Sheet

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
PESHAWAR

(Judicial Department)

Cr.A. No. 875-P/2017
Faheem Khan Vs The State

JUDGMENT

Date of hearing 29.03.2018

Appellant(s) by: Mr. Muhammad Khalid, Advocate

State by: Malik Akhtar Hussain, AAG

ISHTIAQ IBRAHIM, J-. At a trial held by

the learned Judge Special Court (CNS), Peshawar
the appellant Faheem Khan, on being found guilty
under section 9-C CNS, Act, in case FIR No.80
dated 25.12.2015, Police Station ANF, Peshawar
was convicted and sentenced to rigorous
imprisonment for thirty (30) months with benefit of
Section 382-B Cr.PC extended to him vide judgment
dated 21.11.2017.

2. The prosecution case depicted in the

FIR is that on 25.12.2015 that there was information
that a person by the name of Faheem would smuggle
considerable quantity of narcotics via motorway
towards Punjab through GLI Car bearing
Registration No.BB-7177/Peshawar. Upon _ this
information the complainant along with other police
personnel rushed to the spot and made barricade at
the place of occurrence, when in the meanwhile the
motorcar mentioned above coming from Peshawar
side, was signaled to stop and the man who was on
driving seat was overpowered with the help of other
police officials, deboarded and on query disclosed
his name as Faheem Khan s/o Momin Khan. On
cursory interrogation, the accused after some
hesitation admitted the presence of narcotics in his
vehicle concealed under the driver seat. In the
presence of witnesses and the accused, a blue
shopping bag was found beneath the driver seat and
on checking it was having 03 packets charas and the
contraband was weighed which came to 1200/1200
grams, the total of which is 3.600 Kgs. From each
packet 10/10 grams were separated for chemical
analysis while the remaining narcotics were sealed

into separate parcels. Accused was arrested.
Murasila and recovery memos were drafted and were

sent to the Police Station for registration of FIR.
3. On completion of investigation

complete chalan against the accused was submitted.
The provisions of 265-C Cr.PC were complied with
and Charge was framed against the accused to which
he professed his innocence and claimed trial. The
prosecution to substantiate its charge against the
accused produced and examined as many as 04
witnesses and after close of prosecution evidence,
statement of accused was recorded u/s 342 Cr.PC,
wherein he opted to be examined on oath and also
wished to produce evidence in his defence. The
learned Judge Special Court after holding a full
dressed trial convicted and sentenced the
accused/appellant through the impugned judgment,
hence this appeal.

4. Having heard arguments of learned counsel

for the appellant, learned AAG for the State and
record with their valuable assistance gone through.
5. According to the prosecution case the

occurrence is dated 25.12.2015 whereas the card of

arrest of the appellant shows that he was arrested on
24.12.2015 which disturbs the mind of the Court. In
addition to the defence which was taken by the
appellant during trial which was suggested to the
witnesses as well. The accused under section 342 &
342 (2) Cr.PC statement took the plea that he was
taken by the ANF officials from Chughul Pura near
Ring Road, Peshawar when he parked his motorcar
in Patrol Station of Azim Afridi, when he was
proceeding to house after parking his vehicle in the
Filling Station. The appellant also exhibited his
mobile Data as Ex.D1 and mobile Data of the
complainant which negates the version of the
prosecution. That at the time of arrest of accused he
was not having any mobile with him as stated by
PW-3 Hafiz Sohail Umer, even call Data of the
complainant has also been placed on file which
further belies the complainant that his mobile was
switched off. Moreso, the location of mobiles is not
supporting the time and place of arrest of the
appellant, mobile Data was duly exhibited without
any objection on the part of the prosecution which
also belies the complainant (PW3) that he was
present at spot for about 3/4 hours i.e. from 5:45

hours to 21:30 hours. In addition to above, defence
witness (DW-1) namely Zia-ul-Haq was produced,
who was the Chowkidar of the Filling Station,
deposed in the Court that the vehicle was taken from
the Filling Station by the ANF officials which was
being parked by the appellant on daily basis on
payment of Rs.50/- per day, the register of Filling
Station regarding parking of the vehicle was also
produced by the said DW-1.

6. We have before us two versions, first is

that of the prosecution and the other one is that of
the defence and if both the versions are kept in Juxta
position with each other keeping in view the
circumstances of the case, the date of arrest
mentioned in the card of arrest, defence evidence
and mobile Data produced by the appellant during
the course of trial which was never challenged by the
prosecution, the version of the appellant appears to
be more plausible and genuine. Since the case of the
prosecution squarely rests on the statement of ANF
officials and on the other hand the accused has led
defence which has created a reasonable doubt in the
case of prosecution, the appellant is entitled to get

the benefit of the same.
7 It is also settled that if it appears to the

Court that the defence taken by the accused might be
true, even in that eventuality accused is entitled to its
benefit. In this regard reliance is placed on the
judgment of Honourable Supreme Court titled
Nadeem-ul-Haq Khan Vs The State 1985
SCMR 510, wherein it is held that:

"In a criminal case, it is the duty
of the Court to review the entire
evidence that has been
produced by the prosecution
and the defence. If, after an
examination of the whole
evidence, the Court is of the
opinion that there is a
reasonable possibility that the
defence put forward by the
accused might be true, it is
clear that such a view reacts on
the whole prosecution case. In
these circumstances, the
accused is entitled to the
benefit of doubt, not as a matter
of grace, but as of right,
because the prosecution has
not proved its case beyond

reasonable doubt.”
8. For the reasons mentioned herein above,

this appeal is allowed and the conviction and
sentence awarded to the appellant by the learned
Judge Special Court, Peshawar is set aside and the
appellant is acquitted of the charges leveled against
him. The order of the learned trial Court regarding
the confiscation of vehicle is also set aside in the
circumstances of the cases and the concerned
authority is directed to hand over the vehicle bearing
registration No. BB-7177/Peshawar to the appellant.

Announced.
29.03.2018

(DB) Hon’ble Mr. Justice Qalandar Ali Khai Hon’ble Mr. Justice Ishtiag Ibrahim

*Thsan*
