REGISTERED i
No.Crl.A.526/2015 -SCJ imp.) a Hh
SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN |
Islamabad, dated 16th April, 2016, :
The e Registrar, | i i
Supreme Court of Pakistan, i. : PLSHAWAR mienico
Islamabad. A, oe Yo | PESHawwaRe
Subject: CRIMINAL. APPEAL NO. 526 OF 2015 ify
Nawab Khan s/o Azeem Khan
Versus) vt o
i. The State | oS th
ti Mustageem s/o Amant Khan, :
“On: appeal from the Judgment/Order of the Peshawar 4 “|
High Court, Peshawar dated 06.10.2015 in Crl.A. 584- - :
: P/2014 in cas¢ FIR No. 1256 dated 25.10. 2008 :
registered at P, s.  Hoti, District Mardan. fl 7 a
Dear: Sir, | : 7 i
be In: continpation: of ° this Court’s letter. of even number dated

22.1 2015, lam|

is ated. 12.04. 2016 partly allowing the above cited Criminal
jal in ‘the terms, stated therein for information and “urther necessary
action: 7:

iv

1 to, enclose herewith a certified copy of the Judgment

lam further directed to return herewith the original record of the
High Court received vide your letter No. 175/ Sud dated 07.01. 2016.

Please acknowledge receipt of this letter alongwith its enclosure

immediately.
ne : Yourerfaith iully,
Encl: Judgment: i

o/ Record of High Court

ASSISTANT R STRAR (IMP)
FOR REGISTRAR

i
BE
iF
hi
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN
[APPELLATE pene ION)

PRESENT _ |
MR. JUSTICE ASIF SABED KHAN KHSA |
| MR JUSTICE MAQBOOL BAQAR :
ie MR. JUSTICE TARIQ PARVEZ

| i)
526.0F 2015 > vie
nt dated 06.10. 2015 1)
a Court, Peshawar in

[pois and Murder
Reference No. 16- /2014,) | ‘
|

Nawab Khan - a | | ... Appellant ! ti
1. The sete
2. Mustageem —

'...Respondeits é

Ch. Abdul Aziz,

For the Appellant:

For the respondents Mr. Zulfigar A. Bhutta, ASC.

"Mr. Zahid Yousaf, ASC.

‘Date of Hearing 124.2016 ||

u JUDGMENT

TARIQ PARVEZ, J = against judgment dated Pa

6. 10: 2015) passed by the Peshawar High Court, Peshawar in

Criminal Appeal No. 584- P of 2014, leave to appeal wes granted by

this Court | on 17. 12. 2015, inter alia, to consider that where

account of incident has been furnished by Nawab Khen, compliant

Ls (PW-6) and Hai Ihsan ud Din (PW-7) out of whom for ner ie) PW-6 : ; i

vhad the stamp of injuries on his perspn and to their testimony
sufficient _gorsoberation was furnished by medical evitlence;

i
whether: the High Court was justified in recording acquittal of

Nawab Khan, respondent. | 4. |
i ae a ;

Section: 302/928/34 “PPC when he has taken his ceceate son

f
fal
i
|

deceased si yn and ub “grandson Shah Faisal (not prod. ced) ned left

their house for bazaar and when reached the place of occurence

they: found Mustaqeem, respondent along with Arshac and Apanat le

_dcouite co-accused wp all were armed. with

blows of the Kelasbnikovs and was being rescued by his deteased .
son Jawad! Hussain and grandson . gab Faisal, on this the

iring at them. With the fire-shot «f respondent

Mus : geen Jawad Hussain was fatally fhit whereas hz himself and

. Shah F Faisal sustained injures asa result of beating.
Motive for the offence was that an , evening preceding the day
of occurrence an altercation took “8 between con plainant and
the accused party and hence, the crime.

rial held before the learned Addit. snal Sessions

Judge-IV ‘at Mardan the prosecution Jed its evidence “elying on the
ocular account, motive, recoveries, medical - ¢ vidence and

abscondence of the accused whereon the learned tr al Court vide

. judgmen dated 25.10.2014 awarded death sentence to

respondent Mustageem under Section 302 (b) PPC with payment
of compensation of Rs.1,00,000/- and in default six months S.1.
The respondent was also convicted fo an offence ander Section

324 PPC for attempting at the life of the complainant and Shah

1
j

counts with a fing of Rs.50,000/- and in default +o sue six

month Suh. He was | “however, extendet!| bene of Se ction per -B

: gerievest of the judgment ot conviction «nd sentence

Court, Vustaqeem respondent filed Cri-ainal Appeal

i

before the Peshawar High Court, Peet which was heard along

with Murder Reference sent by the learned trial Sourt ‘under

Section: ary of the or P. c. and vide judgment dated €.10. 2015 the

appellant therein ow respondent before us was accuitted | of the
: i ! | :
charge . ana Murder Reference was answered 4 in negative

counsel cl appearing bh behalf of the State. :

6. , ‘Learned counsel appearing for the a opellant has

argued that the learned Division Berk of the Pe shawar High

Court has! ‘erred in law and facts by allowing the appeal. ‘of the

; respondent by holding that medical report of the Doctor
conducting, _postinbitern runs contrary | to the ocular account and
that no tangible evidence has been led in proof of motive. It is
argued that the learned High Court’ thas ignored the fact that
complaint Nawab Khan though father of deceased Ji.wad Hussain

himself has cusigined injuries on his person which by itself is
i

proof of his presehce on the spot which statement could not

disbelieved without any valid ground, Learned cciunsel further

submits thal occurrence in this case has taken place on

25.10.2008, whereas the respondent was arrested in the year 2013

4

thus, “he ‘remained. outa for about ten years whic: will furnish \
| i
decisive ‘roborat in in the instant cee to! the test imony | of the =|

Nawab Khan who has no ho: stility: against | i :

i 6 counsel speeding for the ‘tate adopted

appellant. ' i : |

Rebutti g the submissions made by ‘the learned

| fhe respondent it is argued that the pr: isecution has

fa) independent witness wes been sitec. or erpduced.

fet evidence which could have bee. furnished by

Shah | Faisal an her injured eyewitness has been withheld .

therefore, | presuntption against ti prosecution has i to be ».
withdraws that Shah Faisal though grandson of the complainant, ir
\ supported the cage of the con plainant. It is
argued: that if they motive has been disbelieved by the learned High

: Court then there was no reason for the responden:. to commit an
i : offence of Qatl-i+ “Amd of deceased Jalvad Hussain for no reason.

Learned épunsel. fur ther argued that it has been rightly noticed by H

the learned Division Bench of the High Court thet the entrance

wound on the person of the deceased as against exit wound were

on the higher level, therefore, even the venue of crime will be -

doubtful and so will be presence of the complainan’.
8.) . / | We have thoroughly examined the suomissions made

parties and hav: independently

by the jearned_ counsel for the

scrutinized ame entire evidence that was) pefore the: trial court as
be We will agree with the learned « counsel for
: thay ere was a meager owe regarding dispute
of payment 0 fe) Rs. 16 only which can not be held to te sufficient

motive for commiting crime of Qatljnamd but we are in

disagreement with the findings recorded, wy the learned High. Gout

for dish evil g: » the injured witness namely, Nawab Khan oniylon a

; cm
ground that the enthance wounds were: on the higher .evel on the

body of t deceased as against exit wounds such ifference of

level can be explained for multiple reasons je. when a dullet enters

‘into the body and | adopts a route in vay area. there is: always
: |
deflection of the bullets. which may makes exit

wounds towards either upper or the lower side, wh.ch can also
rol |
because’ “when person is confronted with a { rearms like

Kalashnikov it is 1 ral for him to chi nge his phy: ical position

either by, furning: or. by bending and in such event there is
“jikelihood of entrance and correspondence exit not to be in the

ho

same line apa level.

9. “The occurrence has started initially wit. beating the
|
complainant by the respondent and hip two acquitted co- -agcused

: “grandson Shah Fpisal, intervened, thereafter all the accused are

said: to have resorted to firing but Mustageem, -espondent is

charged solely for causing effective fire-shots.

10. ‘So many objections have been taken as_ ‘to the

the: compasy of the deceased nor the complainant but whose shop

is said to be located in the vicinity of the crime. A-though he has

and it was only when his deceased son Jawad Hussain and his ip

presence of Haji thsan ud Din (PW-7) who initially w..s not dither in Ir

i
|
: i
i
i

stood to, fest pt c

pues Khan (PW- 6)c cannot be doubted on | any

he leaving of houst by the fatk er with the
F

deceased sorliis, naturel, further supported by factum o! ‘injurigs on

‘of Nawab Khan (PW-6) as observed by the doctot are

sustained number (e) ye injures aiid also because not) ‘only
empties were recov vered from the spot bul bullet marke were found
common hujra situated at the spot wh: ch —
the venue of [the crime, and when crim ia reported within fifteen

fee

minutés wit “exclu. the possibility of consultatio; and, false

implication.
The “accused admittedly remained an outlay and) was
declared pio aimed gifender from year 2908 to year 2'113 and this

prolong abscondence) will lend support to the charge against him.

rl in view “of above, we are satisfied to held that the

charge of offence of Qatl- -i-Amd stand Broved agains? respondent

Mustageem through the testimony of Nawab Khan (PW- 6) who

_sustaingd injury and has no reason tc bring. false

}

pimsel as

rebpondent Mustageem and wher Mustagem

remained a proclaimed offender for an unexplained | reriod of ten
years. :
12.0. F Pik find that the finding of guilt recorde | by learned

‘trial Court was corfect but not the sentence awarded and we hold

that the: fining recorded by the learned Division F.ench of the

Criminal Appel No. s26/2015 ate i ay

ie Court are not sustainable which has accepted the

|
the: seth who was convicted by the trial Court.

} : |
Mustakeem, “‘respo dent i is proved, ond is accordin: aly convicted

' PPC but consider. ng the circun astances and

huh
if

cpaing the actual firing, we find that it is a case ‘where

teu i not called for Because when: the occurrence

except when: during the beating the om interve xed to, rescue

md. thee: is every likelihood | of retaliation shown by the

compensation amount of Rs.1,00 ‘oob/- under Section! i 544-A

Cr, C.

cai in gefault of payment to suffer six mouths S.1.
“Compen 5a n sepa ‘shall be reodvered as arvears qf land

e acetiged/ respondent is also extended the benefit of

The

revenue

Section 382- B Cr. ip, Cc. / Q

14. _ AS far as conviction and sentence re sorded under

il

red |

eared | in support of his injuries so on that count no

conviction can be. ‘recorded. The conviction and s:ntence _ under
Section 324 PPC ‘9 the extent of iniuges on the pe’son of Nawab
Khan, complainant is concerned the same are cause d by butt that

too by three accused named in the FIR but no one of the accused

is specified as to who among them caused njury to the
complainant, therefore the benefit of doubt is extended to the

present respondent and he is aa of that charg 2.

vespondent Mustaqeem under Section 302 (b} PPG with «5

MHPPC on two counts is concerned, becau-e Shah Faisal

i

"go sentence svargd by this Court, tous |

‘
yf
these observations this appeal is partly allowed in the

sent to jaa:
this judgment. :

i

‘dic Asif Saeed Khan Khosad
Sd/- Maqbool Baqar, J “|
Sqi- Tariq Parvez, he "|
: Contified to be Frue Copy I

t

“i. Courtdss: We
$uprame Ceurt fPakis
: istamak ad

| |
IREPORTING” i a :
1 mad

al
i i
fn i
1 Is i
i to {
a :
a
hy
re o|
|
a
VE
vl
|
ii
i
