Judgment Sheet

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
PESHAWAR.

JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT

Cr.A No. 81-P of 2013.

JUDGMENT

Date of hearing............... 21.09.2017... e cece eee e cece ne ee eee en eee

Appellant(s)...(Shan Muhammad) by Mr. Ghulam Mohy-ud-Din
Malik, Advocate.

The State: By Mr. Mujahid Ali Khan, AAG.
Wits

QALANDAR ALI KHAN, J:- The complainant,

Mazhar Abbas, HC Marai Police Post, along with
constables Aziz-ur-Rehman No.318, Kiramat Ali
No.898 and Noor Aslam No.298, during checking
on road from Kacha Pakka to Kalaia, Orakzai
Agency opposite Marai Police Post, received spy
information from Kalaia, Orakzai Agency, about

three persons smuggling narcotics in a white
colour motorcar via the Check Post; and stopped
motorcar No.JF-485/Islamabad, having three
persons inside the car, out of whom, the driver
disclosed his name as Shan Muhammad son of
Ikram Khan resident of Mohallah Saidan, Hangu,
the person occupying the front seat disclosing his
name as Hamid Ali son of Said Mir and the third
person in the rear seat disclosing his name as
Burhan Ali son of Zamin Ghulam, both residents
of Paskalay, Hangu; and they all three furnishing
reason for their visit as seeking religious blessing
(Dua). They were, however, de-boarded from the
motorcar and on search of the motorcar, a plastic
sack recovered from digi of the car, apparently,
having walnuts; but search of the sack led to
recovery of ten packets of chars (Garda), and
further search of the motorcar, leading to recovery
of 5/5 packets, total 10 packets of chars (Garda)
from secret cavities of both left and right front
doors of the motorcar. Similarly, artfully concealed
two packets containing opium were recovered
from underneath the driver seat. The weighment of

ten packets of chars (Garda) recovered from Digi
of the car revealed 1000/1000 grams each, and the
ten packets recovered from the front doors of the
car were also 1000/1000 grams each; while each of
the two packets of opium also weighed 1000/1000
grams. The complainant/HC, according to the
murasila and recovery memo, drafted by him,
separated 5/5 grams samples from each packet of
chars (Garda) and Opium for chemical analysis in
FSL and also sealed separately the remaining
contraband in separate parcels on the spot. All the
three accused, who, according to the
complainant/HC, were jointly involved in the
smuggling of chars and opium were arrested on the
spot; and the murasila was sent to P.S Usterzai,
where FIR No.265 dated 23.10.2011 under Section
9 ( C ) CNSA was registered. The samples so
prepared on the spot on 23.10.2011 were received
in the FSL on 03.11.2011; and the chemical
examiner reported the same to be samples of chars
and opium in his report dated 05.11.2011.

2. Ghazi Usman SI/I.O (PW3) prepared the

site plan on the pointation of complainant and
marginal witnesses to the recovery memo, namely,
constable Aziz-ur-Rehman No.318 and Kirmat Ali
No.898 and also produced all the three accused to
the Judicial Magistrate, on the expiry of their
police custody, for recording their confessional
statements udnerSection364/164 Cr.PC; but they
refused to make confessional statements. After
recording statements of PWs under Section 161
Cr.PC, and completion of investigation, complete
challan was submitted in the case by SHO P.S
Usterzai.

3. After receipt of challan in the Court, the
learned trial Court/Additional Sessions Judge,
Kohat, famed joint formal charge against all the
three accused, to which they pleaded not guilty and
claimed trial.

4. During trial the prosecution produced a
total of five PWs, comprising Saeed Khan
Inspector/SHO P.S Usterzai, Kohat (PW.1), who
submitted complete challan in the case;
Muhammad Arshad Khan Muharrir P.S Usterzai,
Kohat (PW.2), registered FIR EXPA/1 on the

receipt of murarsila, Ghazi Usman SI (PW3),
conducted investigation in the case; Mazhar Abas
HC (PW4), complainant and seizing officer in the
case; and Aziz-ur-Rehman No.318 (PW.5), witness
to the alleged recovery and also marginal witness

to the recovery memo.

5. After prosecution closed its evidence,
statements of the accused were recorded under
Section 342 Cr.PC, wherein they denied charges of
the prosecution, but declined to be examined on
oath under Section 340(2) Cr.PC and/or produce
defence evidence.

6. Following arguments of learned APP and
learned defence counsel, the learned _ trial
Court/Additional Sessions Judge-V, Kohat,
rendered impugned judgment dated 10.01.2013,
whereby, the appellant/accused Shan Muhammad
was convicted under Section 9 ( C ) CNSA and
sentenced to imprisonment for life and fine of
Rs.50,000/- or in default to S.I for one month;
while, at the same time, acquitted the remaining
two accused namely Hamid Ali and Burhan Ali of

the charges against them. The vehicle used in the
commission of the offence and taken into
possession by the police was already released on
superdari to the owner namely Shahadat Khan,
therefore, the learned trial Court directed that the
same be returned to him being its lawful owner (if
not yet returned); hence the instant criminal appeal
against his conviction and sentence by the
convict-appellant.

7. Arguments of learned counsel for the
convict-appellant and learned AAG heard; and
record perused.

8. The complainant was Head Constable,
posted in the Police Post at some distance of the
Police Station but he did not inform SHO of P.S
Usterzai despite receiving information 2 1/2 hours
before at 1000 AM prior to the alleged recovery at
1230 hours. The marginal witnesses to the
recovery memo were also police constables posted
in the same police post with the complainant/HC,
being their Incharge, with no independent evidence,
which assumed importance to the detriment of the
prosecution case in view of the fact that the entire

proceedings, including initial investigation, were
conducted on the spot by the HC, as only site plan
was prepared by the S.I/I.O, who also conducted
further partial investigation of obtaining police
custody of the accused and producing them before
the Judicial Magistrate for recording their
confessional statement and also _ recorded
statements of the PWs under Section 161 Cr.PC;
thus warranting close and cautious scrutiny of the
evidence adduced by the prosecution.

9. The samples separated from the bulk on
23.10.2011 were received in the FSL after
considerable delay of 11 days, with no evidence
forthcoming about safe custody of the samples
during the intervening period, thus making report
of the chemical examiner in this respect seriously
doubtful.

10. The learned trial Court/Additional
Sessions Judge-V, Kohat, acquitted the remaining
two accused namely Hamid Ali and Burhan Ali on
the basis of the same set of evidence, which was
made basis for conviction and sentence of the
appellant/accused, albeit on the sole ground that he

was found on the driving seat, without proof of his
ownership or being driver of the motorcar. The
motorcar was released on superdari to the owner,
namely, Shahadat Khan, without bringing anything
on the record to either show the appellant/accused
as driver of the motorcar or the fact that the
contraband were concealed by him in the motorcar
and not by the said owner. It may be added here
that, otherwise, all the three accused were found in
the motorcar wherefrom the contraband chars
and opium were recovered from Digi and left and
right doors of the motorcar and also underneath
the driving seat; which, according to the FIR, were
jointly being smuggled by all the three accused.

11. All the above stated discrepancies in
the prosecution case were over looked by the
learned trial Court while awarding the sentence of
imprisonment for life to the appellant/accused
under Section 9 C CNSA. Therefore, the appeal is
accepted, and the impugned judgment/order of the
learned trial Court/ASJ-V, Kohat dated 10.01.2013
is set aside, together with conviction and sentence

recorded by learned Judge Special Court/ASJ-V, Kohat

dated 10.01.2013. Consequently, the appellant — is
acquitted of the charges leveled against him, and be

set free forthwith, if not required in any other

case.
Announced.
21.09.2017.
JUDGE
JUDGE
*Ayub*

(D.B) Hon’ble Mr. Justice Lal Jan Khattak.
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Qalandar Ali Khan.
