JUDGMENT SHEET
PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,PESHAWAR
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT)

Criminal Appeal No.476-P of 2012.
RiAZ....t.cceeceeee eee VeIrSUS......1.0c0c20e The State.
JUDGMENT.

Date of hearing 31° March 2015.
Appellant(s) by Mr. Jalal ud Din Akbar Azam (Gara), advocate.
Complainant by Ishtiaq Ibrahim, advocate & Rab Nawaz Khan

AAG.

WAQAR AHMAD SETH, J:- Riaz appellant

has, through the instant appeal, challenged his conviction
and sentence awarded by the learned Additional
Sessions  Judge-Ill,Swabi vide judgment dated
10/10/2012, whereby he was found guilty for the murder
of Suhail Shah deceased. The appellant has been
convicted under section 302(b) PPC and sentenced to
imprisonment for life in case FIR No.599 dated
09/07/2004 under section 302/324/34 PPC registered at
Police Station, Kalu Khan Swabi.

2- Precisely stating facts of the case as disclosed by
the prosecution before the trial Court are that on
09/07/2004 at 19.40 hours complainant Sohail Shah then
injured and in conscious condition made a report to the
police at Civil Hospital, Kalu Khan, to the effect that four

days prior to the occurrence, an altercation took place
with accused Mujahid, Abid Khan, Ijaz and Farman Said
over playing a cricket and on the day of occurrence he
alongwith his brother Fawad Shah and Samiullah son of
Bacha Khan had gone to playground for playing cricket,
meanwhile accused Mujahid, Abbas Khan, Ijaz and
Farman Said duly armed with deadly weapons came
there and started firing as a result of which the
complainant sustained injuries while his — other
companions escaped unhurt. The — complainant
succumbed to his injuries in the Lady Reading Hospital,
Peshawar at night time. After the commission of offence
the accused decamped from the spot.

3- The above report of the complainant then injured
was recorded by Afsar Said S/ (P.W.3) in the shape of
Murasila Ex.PA/1 in presence of his brother Fawad Ali
Shah which was read over to him who after admitting the
same to be correct thumb impressed the same. The
report was also signed by Fawad Ali Shah as verifier.
P.W.3 also prepared injury sheet Ex.PW2/2 of the injured
Sohail and sent the Murasila to the Police Station for
registration of the case. The aforesaid report was also
verified by the concerned doctor.

4- The first to surrender was Farman Said co-
accused of the appellant who was arrested in the case on

26/07/2004. He was tried in the Court of learned
Additional Sessions Judge-!ll,Swabi and on conclusion of
trial, he was acquitted from the charges levelled against
him vide judgment dated 16/09/2006.

4- Subsequently, the appellant Riaz was arrested in
the case and supplementary challan was submitted
before the trial Court where on 21/07/2011 he was
formally charged to which he pleaded not guilty and claim
trial. In order to prove its case the prosecution examined
as many as thirteen witnesses. Statement of the convict-
appellant was recorded under section 342 CrP.C.
wherein he denied the prosecution allegations and
professed his innocence. He however, neither wished to
be examined on oath as his own witness under section
340(2) Cr.P.C. nor opted to produce evidence in defence.
On conclusion of trial, learned trial Court, after hearing
both the sides, convicted and sentenced the appellant, as
mentioned above. Hence, the instant appeal.

5- We have gone through the record carefully and
considered the arguments advanced by the learned
counsel for the parties.

6- The record reveals that Suhail Shah having been
injured was taken to the Hospital where he lodged the
report in the Casualty. Since he died, this report was
treated as dying declaration. The prosecution besides

relying on this piece of evidence, also examined Syed
Fawad Ali Shah — brother (P.W.10) and Samiullah
maternal cousin (P.W.11) of the deceased, then injured,
who according to the dying declaration, happened to be
eye witnesses of this incident. Thus the prosecution case
primarily rest on the dying declaration of the deceased
and the ocular account of the incident furnished by
P.Ws.10 & 11. There can be no cavil with the proposition
that the statement of the deceased in the form of an
F.1.R. can be treated as a dying declaration which itself is
good enough under Article 46 of Qanun-e-Shahadat
Order, 1984 for sustaining conviction on a capital charge.
But for believing dying declaration and convicting a
person on its basis, the following essential conditions
must be established by the prosecution:-

(i) That dying man was in full senses,
conscious and alert to the surrounding,
was fully oriented in space and time and
was able to make a coherent speech.

(ii) | That the dying declaration otherwise rings
true and is sound in substance to be relied
upon.

(iii) That it is free from promptness given by the
outside quarter.

(iv) That Doctor present at the occasion shall give
a fitness certificate about the condition of the

dying man.

7- Keeping in view the above principles in mind, it is to

be seen that whether the maker of the statement Ex.PA/1
was in a fit condition to make a statement. Afsar Said
Khan Sub Inspector, who recorded the report of the
deceased then injured in the shape of Murasila Ex.PA/1
was examined as P.W3. He has stated that on
09/07/2004 at 1940 hours Suhail Shah son of Hidyat
Bacha resident of Ismaila in full senses reported the
matter to him in injured condition which he recorded in the
shape of Murasila Ex.PA which was read over and
explained to him and after admitting the same to be
correct he thumb impressed the same. He further stated
that the report of the injured was recorded in the
presence of his brother Fawad Ali Shah who confirmed it
and also signed it. The report of the complainant/injured
was also verified by the concerned doctor. He prepared
the injury sheet Ex.PW2/2 of the injured complainant and
referred him for medicolegal examination to the doctor
through Constable Sagib Shah. In his cross examination
this witness had admitted some overwriting in the
Murasila regarding time of report. He had not inquired
about the literacy of the complainant. The signature of the
doctor was obtained on the Murasila after about fifteen
minutes of recording the same. He was in the Police
Station when asked by the Moharrir to proceed to the
hospital where according to him an injured had taken.

After recording the report and obtaining thumb impression
of the complainant and signature of Fawad Ali Shah
thereon he prepared the injury sheet. There is nothing in
his statement that he obtained any fitness certificate from
the doctor about the condition of the dying man. Dr.Gul
Muhammad Khan, who examined the deceased then
injured was examined as P.W.2. He stated that he
examined the patient at 0730 PM on 09/07/2004 and
prepared medicolegal report Ex.PW2/1. It means that the
deceased then injured was examined by the Doctor
before making the report, which was drafted by P.W.3 at
19.40 hours. In his cross examination he stated that he
had correctly noted the time of arrival of victim as 07.30
PM in the MLR and same is the time of examination of the
injured. His signature was obtained by the police on the
report of the injured. He had not specifically noted the
condition of injured being dangerous fo life by then. He
further deposed that duration between the death and post
mortem examination as assessed by him approximately is
within 4 to 5 hours which show the time of death between
08.15 and 09.15 PM keeping in view the time of PM
examination. The prosecution has _ failed to
examine/produce the Doctor who examined the deceased
then injured in the Lady Reading Hospital, Peshawar. It is
pertinent to mention here that the said Doctor namely

Ihsanullah who examined the deceased then injured in
the Lady Reading Hospital, Peshawar was examined as
P.W.13 in the earlier trial of the acquitted accused
wherein he stated that he attended the injured Sohail at
1020 A.M. on 09/07/2004 who expired at 1030 A.M. In the
face of this medical evidence it was the duty of the police
official concerned to have obtained the certificate from the
Doctor before recording the statement of the injured that
he was in fit condition to give statement. Such certificate
was not obtained and no reasonable explanation for this
omission was given by the police official concerned. In the
circumstances fitness of injured to make a statement
Ex.PA remained doubtful. Reliance in this respect is
made to (1983 P.Cr.L.J. 2075) and ( 1989 P.Cr.L.J.1).

8- __ It is universal principle of criminal jurisprudence that
dying declaration itself is not strong evidence being not
tested by way of cross-examination. The only reason for
accepting the same is the belief phenomenon of the Court
of law that a person apprehending death due to injury,
caused to him is ordinarily not expected to speak a
falsehood. To believe or disbelieve a dying declaration,
thus, is left to the ordinary human judgment. However, the
Courts always insist upon strong, independent and
reliable corroborative evidence for the sake of
dispensation of justice. As it is repeatedly held by the

august Supreme Court that relying blindly and without
proper scrutiny on such a statement, would be no less
dangerous approach on the part of the Courts of law.
Reference is made to “Muhammad Yaseen...Vs....The
State (1972 S C M R 303). A rule of caution was also
laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in case of
“Tawab_Khan_and_another....Vs....The State (PLD
1970 Supreme Court 13). Reference is also made to
(2011 S C M R 464) wherein the Hon’ble Judge while
dealing with similar situation observed as under:-

“Mere Dying Declaration shrouded by
mystery and fraught with so may
infirmities is not enough to convict a
person---Dying Declaration is weaker type
of evidence, which needs corroboration
when fully corroborated by other reliable
evidence---Facts and circumstances of
each case have to be kept in view and also
credibility, reliability and acceptability of

such Declaration by Court”.

9- From the perusal of the impugned judgment of the
trial Court, we came to the conclusion that the learned
trial Judge has not properly appreciated and scrutinized
the evidence produced on the record. It is based on
misreading and non-reading of evidence and also on
surmises and conjectures. The prosecution could not
prove this material piece of evidence.

10- The next piece of evidence relied upon by the

prosecution is ocular account furnished by Syed Fawad
Ali Shah (P.W.10) and Samiullah (P.W.11). Both are
brother and maternal cousin of the deceased, thus
closely related inter se. It is well settled principle of
criminal justice that in case where the eye witnesses are
closely related and inimical towards the accused in that
eventuality intrinsic worth of the testimony of those
witnesses is to be assessed/seen whether they are
truthful witnesses and their presence at the spot at the
relevant time of occurrence is established and their
testimony would require strong corroboration from other
reliable circumstantial evidence on record. Syed Fawad
Ali Shah while appearing in the witness box as PW-10
has narrated the same story which was put forward by
Sohail Shah deceased then injured in the Murasila
Ex.PA/1. Samiullah appeared as PW-11 has also
supported Syed Fawad Ali Shah (P.W.10) in the
examination-in-chief of his statement. During the cross
examination Syed Fawad Ali Shah (P.W.10) had
deposed that he signed the report at about 7.30 or 7.40
PM and his statement was recorded by the police at 9.30
or 10.00 PM and he do not know ASI Afsar Said Khan.
He further deposed that on the day of occurrence only
the children were playing cricket at the relevant time
while they were simply sitting. He had not produced any

cricket bat, ball or wicket to the |.0. He had not stated in
10

police statement that his brother Suhail Shah made
report to the police. He had not counted the number of
fire shots opened at them. He was fired at from a
distance of 15/20 paces. Shohail Shah had died in
Peshawar, however, he was not accompanying him at
that time. His injured brother had not narrated the
occurrence to his brother Fayyaz Ali and other persons
attracted to the spot. Fayaz Ali and other Mohalladars
reached the spot after 5/10 minutes of the occurrence.
Samiullah appeared as P.W.11 who stated that he came
behind the deceased Suhail Shah and P.W.Fawad and
went to cricket ground in routine at about 6.15 or 6.30
PM where the accused party came there armed with
Kalashnikovs and pistol and opened firing at them as a
result of which Suhail Shah was hit while they escaped
unhurt and the accused decamped from the spot. The
deceased then injured was shifted to CH Kalu Khan In
his cross examination he deposed that the house of the
deceased may be at a distance of 150 meters from the
spot. He only remember Sajjad Ali Shah who put the
injured on cot and none else. The injured had not
narrated the occurrence to the persons attracted to the
spot after the occurrence. The injured also did not talk to
him. They used to go to the playground for practicing

cricket and for that practice six persons used to
11

participate on either side. He had not shown any plying
instrument to the IO during spot inspection. He had not
accompanied the injured to the hospital. He cannot give
the number of fire shots fired by the accused however,
many shots were fired. Hence, the above glaring
contradiction in their statements is sufficient to discard
their testimony and to brush it aside because it is by now
well settled proposition of law that single glaring
contradiction in between the statement of the eye
witnesses is sufficient to cast doubt on the veracity of
their testimony and render it unbelievable. Moreover, in
the Murasila Ex.PA/1 the deceased then injured has
shown the time of occurrence as 18.30 (6.30) hours
which was reported by him at 19.40 (7.40) hours while
time of examination of the injured by the doctor has been
shown as 7.30 PM. There is also delay of one hour and
ten minutes in lodging of the report for which no
plausible and convincing explanation has been furnished
by both the alleged eye witnesses. Their presence on
the spot at the time of occurrence and telling truth
regarding the occurrence has been held by us in the
earlier paragraph to be doubtful hence, this inordinate
delay is also fatal to prosecution because place of
occurrence is not situated in far flung area and it also

casts doubt on the prosecution case and presence of the
12

witnesses on the spot at the time of occurrence and
renders the authenticity of the contents of report shaky.
Had they been present with deceased at the time of
occurrence on the spot then why such inordinate delay
took place in shifting the deceased then injured to
hospital and moreover why they were spared by the
accused two in number armed with firearms as per story
of the prosecution. None of the two PWs have sustained
any scratch what to say about any firearm injury, despite
that they were at the mercy of the accused having
automatic weapons which eject number of shots in
seconds. It is not the case of the prosecution that the
PWs took shelter somewhere at the time of incident. It
does not appeal to a prudent mind that the assailants
who are mentally and physically well prepared to take
the two brothers and cousin, would spare the other
brother who is at their mercy or to spare their other
relative, so as to stand eyewitness against them. In view
of the above discussion we have reached to an
irresistible conclusion that the statements of both the eye
witnesses are suffering from material contradictions,
discrepancies and deliberate dishonest improvements,
making their presence on the spot highly doubtful,
therefore, we disbelieve their testimony which cannot be

relied upon.
13

11- It is pertinent to mention here that earlier
Farman Said co-accused of the appellant was tried by
the learned Additional Sessions Judge-lll, Swabi and
after conclusion of the trial, he was acquitted from the
charges levelled against him vide judgment dated
16/09/2006 against which no appeal either by the State
or by the complainant party has been filed and in the
instant trial the same evidence has been produced by
the prosecution which was produced in the earlier trial. It
is settled principle of criminal jurisprudence that when a
competent Court has not believed the evidence
produced by the prosecution in convicting an accused,
then the same evidence would thus not be considered
sufficient to convict the other co-accused in the case,
more so, for a capital charge.

12- No doubt, proceedings under section 512
Cr.P.C. were initiated and completed against the
appellant, however, he has denied his abscondance in
his statement under section 342 CrP.C. There is no
cavil to the proposition, that abscondance may constitute
a corroborative evidence against a person accused for
an offence. However, when there is no direct evidence
against an accused or the evidence produced is not
reliable or trustworthy to convict a person for a capital

charge, then abscondance, even if for a prolonged
14

period, would be of no legal avail to the prosecution’s
case. Reliance may be sought from “Siraj
Din....Vs...VS...Kala_ (PLD 1964 Supreme Court 26)
and Taj Muhammad....Vs...Resham Khan (1986 S C
M R 823). Sardar Khan....Vs...The State (1998 SC M
R_ 1823 and Muhammad Khan...Vs....The State (1999
S CMR 1220).

13- In the circumstances, this Court finds that the
case of the present appellant is not distinguishable from
that of the acquitted co-accused Farman Said, therefore,
his conviction based on the insufficient evidence cannot
legally stand the test of safe administration of criminal
justice.

14- In the wake of the aforesaid discussion, we are of
the considered view that the prosecution has failed to
establish its charge against the appellant beyond
reasonable shadow of doubt and the trial Court has not
properly appreciated the facts and _ circumstances
brought on record and the evidence on file while
convicting him. Thus the impugned judgment being
based on mis-reading and non-reading of evidence in its
true perspective is not sustainable in the eye of law and
liable to be set aside. Consequently, we while extending
the benefit of doubt to appellant Riaz, accept this appeal,

set aside his conviction & sentence awarded to him
15

through impugned judgment dated 10/10/2012 by the
learned Additional Sessions Judge-l!l, Swabi and acquit
him from the charge levelled against him He be set at
liberty forthwith if not required to be detained in any
other case. However, the findings/observations recorded
above shall have no bearing upon the case of the
absconding accused who have been declared
proclaimed offender by the trial Court and they shall be
tried independently after their arrest and their case shall
be disposed of on its own merits after their arrest.

ANNOUNCED.
Dated: 31/03/2015.

JUDGE

JUDGE
