WAR HI a." [NGORA BENCH (DAR-UL-QAZA) A¥ SWAT.

Fi) /2015. , / (9)

ileeiteneneteheeaeinaiataeeaerereetnanent ees Proreewanannnee wan nanneennnmn en —wonanaun-m—wen==—-Petitioner,
Versus

awar Zeb S/o Khan Badshab R/o Amandara

Muhsmmed Tariq S/o Muhammad Sultan R/o Asraf Abad village Takhtbai

ed ur Rehman S/o Habib ar Rehmag R/o Korkaman Banda Dargai

taf Khan S/O Moamber khan R/O Petao Banda Meherdi

meed Ullah S/o Muhammad Akbar R/o Jari Sakhakot

iraj S/o Muhammad Jan R/o Khat Kaley Jari Sakhakot

r S/o Taj Mubkammad R/O Azam Kalay Takhtbai District Mardan

' (Respondents / Accused).

FIR No.126 Dated 01-09-2012 US 17(2) OAPO-324/451/452/337-A/337-F(ivSO6((B\/148/149 PPC/13 AO,
Post Sakbakot. /

| This occurrence took place on 01/09/2012 at 2:00 hours which wag immediately reported to the

| Local Police on spot. Complainant Junaid Khan reported that iq. slong with his family were
sleeping in his house when at 02:00 hours he heard some voice on which he got up and in the light 7
of torch he noticed two armed persons who on seeing the complainant aim at him. The father of
complainant was also a waken and accused Anwar Zeb made firing at father of complainant as a
result of which he sustained injury. On their hue and cry the uncle of complainant was also
attracted to the spot where complainant and his uncle Azizur Rehman apprehend accused Anwar
Zeb along with 30 bore pistol. In the mean while the Levy officials were attracted to the spot to

_| whom the complainant and his uncle produced the apprehended accused Anwar Zeb along with 30

'| bore Pistol and Juniad made report which was reduced into writing in the shape of Murasilla on

which the instant FIR was registered. During investigation the accused also named his co-accused —

who were also implicated in the instant case. On completion of investigation Challan was

submitted in the Court against the accused. Charged was framed against the accused to which they

pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. Prosecution produced 10 witnesses in Support of its case.

When the Prosecution evidence was closed the accused was examined U/S 342 Cr.PC. On hearing

arguments the accused were acquitted vide impugned Judgment dated #3/1 1/2014, hence the

instant appeal of the following grounds inter alia: FILES TODAY

: dy
hat Judgment of the Learned Trial Court by acquitting the accused is against law, facts of the case
and evidence available on the file and hence not tenable. (Attested copy of Judgment and‘other
levant documents are attached). : eo :

i
1
t
i

ha Secused Anwar Zeb was arrested on the spot red handed along with 30 bore plato,
at during interrogation accused Anwar Zeb disclosed the names of all the i ou $0 involved.
1) te commission of offence.

JUDGMENT SHEET
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
MINGORA BENCH (DAR-UL-QAZA), SWAT
(Judicial Department)

Cr.A No. 55-M/2015
JUDGMENT

Date of hearing: 29.1.2016

Date of announcement: 22.2.2016

Appellant: (State) by Mr, Rafiq Ahmad,
Assistant Advocate Geheral.

Respondents: (Anwar Zeb and others) by

Mr. Aziz Muhammad Advocate,
tt, AGvocate,

HAIDER ALI KHAN, J.- Through the instant
appeal, the State has impugned the Judgment dated
27.11.2014 of the learned Additional Sessions
Judge/Izafi Zilla Qazi, Malakand at Dargai whereby
the respondents were acquitted in case F.LR No. 126
dated 01.9,.2012 under sections 324/45 1/452/337-A/
337-F(i)/506-B/148/149 PPC, 17(2) OAPO, 13 A.O
registered at Police Station/ Levy Post Sakha Kot,
District Malakand,

2. Precise and relevant facts of the case are

that on 01.9.2012 at 92:20 hours the complainant

Tjematass IChA No. 55°M OF 2015 The State Vs, Anwar Zeb and others:
’
nN
‘
cy «

Junaid Khan son of Abdur Rahim handed over the
accused Anwar Zeb alongwith a 30 bore pistol to the
local police and reported to the effect that on the
previous night he alongwith other inmates of his
house were asleep; upon hearing a sound he woke
up at 02:00 hours, turned on the torch and saw two
accused in the veranda of his house who threatened
the complainant and other inmates of the house with
his gun; in the meanwhile, father of the complainant
tried to overpower him but was fired at by accused
Anwar Zeb and caused him firearm injury; on
raising hue and cry, uncle of the complainant
namely Aziz-ur-Rehman came to the spot; in the
meanwhile one of the accused fled from the scene
whereas the complainant, his mother and uncle
Overpowered the accused Anwar Zeb who during the
scuffle caused a blow to the complainant with his
pistol with which he got injured on his face while his

left palm was burnt with the barrel of the pistol

Tyrmutes: “CrANo. 55-M of 2015 The State Vs. Anwar Zeb and others:

™

a=}
Loe

-3-
when he was snatching it from the accused Anwar
Zeb; the mentioned accused was later on locked in a
room of the house; uncle of the complainant also
Sustained slight injuries during that scuffle; the other
accused present on the rooftop also made aerial
firing; the injured Abdur Rahim was shifted to
Dargai hospital whereas the local police reached on
the spot on hearing the firing to whom the above
report was made by the complainant,

The local police took the accused
Anwar Zeb and the pistol in custody. Report of the
complainant was recorded vide Murasila, Ex.PA on
the basis whereof the above referred FIR was
registered against the accused.
3. During investigation of the case, co-
accused Muhammad Tariq, Saeed-ur-Rehman, Altaf
Khan, Hamidullah, Siraj and Nasar Khan were also
arrested in the case and after completion of the

investigation, challan was submitted in the Court for

Fiametese {CCA No. 55-M of 2015 The State Vs. Anwar Zeb and others:

trial of the accused who were formally charged for
the offences but they pleaded not guilty and claimed
the trial. The prosecution produced and examined as
many as ten witnesses in Support of its case and
consequent thereupon statements of the accused
were recorded under section 342, Cr.P.C, however,
they neither opted to record their statements on oath
nor they wished to Produce evidence in their
defence. At the conclusion of the trial, the learned
trial Court found the accused innocent and acquitted
them vide judgment dated 27.11.2014. Hence, the
instant appeal.

4. The learned A.A.G. appearing on behalf
of the State argued that the respondent/accused
Anwar Zeb was arrested on the spot alongwith 30
bore pistol who disclosed the names of other co-
accused but the Icarned trial Court did not consider
this crucial aspect and delivered the impugned

judgment of acquittal which is against the law and

Tfamutos Cr.A No. 55-M of 2015 The State Vs. Anwar Zeb and others
facts on the record. He further contended that the
prosecution version is duly supported by the medical
as well as other circumstantial evidence besides, the
testimony of the prosecution Witnesses has not been
shattered by the defence but despite the same
reliable and trustworthy evidence of the Prosecution,
the respondents/accused were acquitted outrightly
without any legal justification. The leamed A.A.G.
concluded that the Prosecution has proved the case
against the respondents/accused beyond any doubt,
therefore, the impugned judgment is liable to be set
aside and the respondents/accused by convicted and
sentenced in accordance with law,

5. Learned counsel for the respondents/
accused on his turn vehemently defended the
impugned Judgment and contended that there are
serious doubts and dents in the Prosecution case
besides there are glaring contradictions in the

Statements of the prosecution witnesses, therefore,

Tprmates: CEA No. 55-M of 2015 The State Vs, Anwar Zeb and others:

the respondents/accused cannot be legally convicted
on the basis thereof. He added that the impugned
order of the trial Court is according to law and facts
on the record, therefore, the same calls for no
interference by this Court.

6. I have heard the arguments of the
learned A.A.G, as we'!! as of the learned counsel for
the respondents/accuscd and have gone through the
record in light of their valuable assistance,

7. As per prosecution version, the
respondent/accused Anwar Zeb was arrested red-
handed on the spot alongwith pistol, locked inside a
toom and was handed over to the local police at the
time of report. Whether or not the above stance of
the prosecution gets any support from the evidence,
is a question which needs to be determined in the
light of statements recorded by PWs and other
circumstantial evidence. Record shows that the

respondent/accused Anwar Zeb had sustained

Bpamatese (Cr.A No. 55-Mf of 2015 The State Vs, Anwar Zeb and others;

4
injuries during the scuffle who was brought by the
levy officials for medical treatment to Dargai
hospital where he was examined by Dr. Akbar
Hussain (PW-1) and his report in this regard is
available on the record as Ex.PW-1/3. According to
this report the respondent/accused Anwar Zeb had
sustained three types of injuries detail whereof has
been mentioned in the medical report. It is
noteworthy that the complainant himself as well as
his father had also sustained injuries in the
occurrence who were also medically examined by
the same doctor PW-] nearly at the same time. The
only difference that appears is that of time as the
complainant and his father were examined by the
doctor at 3:00 a.m and 2:45 am respectively
whereas the respondents/e-cused was brought to
hospital at 4:00 a.m by the levy officials. The above
mentioned difference of time is neither fatal to the

rosecution case nor was ‘ necessary that all the
ry

Tamales: ‘Cr.A No. 55-M of 2015 The State Vs, Anwar Zeb and others:

injured should have been brought to the hospital at
the same time. Moreso, the complainant had no
concern with the injuries of the respondent/accused
and his examination by the doctor was at the
disposal of the levy of ficials, therefore, the above
referred time difference has no adverse effect on the
Prosecution case. Record alsa shows that father of
the complainant sustained “rearm injury which was
caused by the responcent/accused Anwar Zeb. This
contention of the commlainat also gets support from
the medical report E'x.PW-!/1 as well as statement
of the doctor (PW-1) oven the injured was referred
to LRH being in serious condition. The concerned
doctor, while d iscussine the wound at Serial No.3 of
the report, has also mentioned that “a cut with loss
of skin with sunpow'cr wound seen on dorsum of
penis” which is of much importance as the same
Suggests that the firing wae caused to the injured

Abdur Rahim from a close stance which is also the

Tifewul-oss CrA No. 55-M4 of 2015 The State Vs. Anwar Zeb and others

coach

stance of the complainant in his initial report.
Similarly, according to the initial report the
complainant also sustained injuries on his cheek and
left hand which fact has been confirmed by the
doctor in his report vide Ex.PW-1/2. The above facts
regarding examination of the injured almost at the
same time alongwith the respondent/accused Anwar
Zeb show that all the injured including the
respondent/accused sustained injuries in the same
incident. The learned trial Court has held that
recognition of the respancent’/sccused Anwar Zeb in
darkness is doubtful end that he was known to the
complainant beforehand besides, he had not told the
physical features of the said accused to the local
police. Although, according to the statement of the
complainant, the resnondent’secused disclosed his
name after his apprehension and the same fact has
been confirmed by the defnce counsel by asking a

question in this regard from Pweg Aziz-ur-Rehman

Bamatese CrA No. 55-M of 2015 The State Vs. Anwar Zeb and others:

who has also stated that the accused had disclosed
his name prior to the arrival of the police, however,
the above points taken notice of by the learned trial
Court would certainly have value in case the accused
had decamped from the spot but in my view, the
above points have no significance at all when he was
already apprehended inside the house and locked up
in a room.

8. Another imnestant thing that connects
the respondent/accucet wit}y tha commission of the
offence is the recovery of 30 bore pistol effected
from the respondent Anvwo~ “cb on the spot which
has been taken into posversion as Ex.PW-10/1.
Similarly, the 1.0 has collected three crime empties
of the same caliber (eam "he veranda of the house
and took into possession ths “ome through recovery
memo Ex.PW-2/3, According to the E.S.L report,
one empty shell out of thres hac been fired from the

pistol which was sn-t-hee y the complainant from

Tejematess (CONN. 55-M of 2015 The State Vs, Anwar Zeb and others;

-ll-

ino
~

the respondent/accused Anwar Zeb. The above fact
further supports the prosecution version from which
the presence of the accused Anwar Zeb on the spot
is also well established, Similarly, the blood stained
clothes of the injured Abdur Rahim alongwith a
blood-stained piece of bed linen used by the injured
have also been chemically examined which report is
also in positive. This report also confirms that the
occurrence took lace inside the house.
Astonishingly, the learned t#!y] 7 ourt has not uttered
a single word reeardine the above mentioned
important evidence, therefore, the impugned
Judgment is the resu't of ne~-reading and non-
appreciation of the evitence on the record.

9, In addition to the “hove, the statements
of the eye-witnesses are ‘n h-rmony on material
points and the contradictiors ye “cred to by learned
Counsel for the respendents/a--used are minor in

nature. The accumulative effoe: <6 the prosecution is

Tjamotos: °CrA Na. §5-M af 2015 The State Vs. Anwar Zeb and others;

-12- WW

that the Tespondent/accused Anwar Zeb is involved
‘in the commission of the offence and his presence
inside the house on the night of occurrence is well
established from the direct as well as circumstantial
evidence. While applying the principle of separating
stain from the chaff, the role of the
Tespondent/accused Anwar Zcb has become very
clear and there is no Serious dent in the Prosecution
case benefit whereof could be extended to him.
Therefore, it is held that the leamed trial Court has
Not properly appreciated the evidence on the record,
hence, the impugned judgment to the extent of
Tespondent Anwar Zch is not sustainable,

10. In light of the above discussion, the
Prosecution has proved its case against the
respondent/accused Anwar Zeb beyond any doubt,
therefore, this appeal is partially allowed, the
impugned judgment dated 27.1 1.2014 of the leamed

Additional Sessions JudgeTzafi Zilla Qazi,

ianabes ‘SrA No. s9M of 005 The State Va. Anwar Zab and otheng

Malakand at Dargai, delivered in case FIR No.126
dated 01.9.2012, under sections 324/45 1/452/337-A/

337-F(i)/506-B/148/ 149 PPC, 17(2) OAPO, 13 A.O

registered at Police Station/Levy Post Sakhakot,
District Malakand is partially set aside, Resultantly
the respondent-accused Anwar Zeb son of Khan
Badshah is convicted under section 324 PPC and
sentenced to rigorous imprisonment for five years
with fine of Rs:50,000/- as compensation payable to
injured Abdur Rahim or in default thereof to
undergo further two months S.1. Similarly, he is also
convicted under section 337-F(v) and sentenced to
three years rigorous imprisonment with payment of
Rs.50,000/- as Dhaman payahle to the injured Abdur
Rahim or in default thercof the same shall be
recovered as arrears of the lard revenue. He is also
convicted under section 13 A.O and sentenced to
one year S.1 with fine of Rs.10,000/- or in default

thereof he will further undereo one month S.I. The

Tiametes {Cr No. 55°M of 2015 The State Ve. Anwar Zeb and other

sentences shall run concurrently and benefit of
section 382-B CrP.c. is extended to him. The
period for which the respondent/convict remained in
Jail during pendency of this appeal shall also be
counted towards the above men‘'oned punishment of
imprisonment, The respondent-convict present in
Court is directed to be formally: taken into custody
with regard to his conviction ond be dealt with in
accordance with law. The instant appeal to the
extent of the remaining respondents/accused is
dismissed and the impuened Juc=:nent to their extent
is maintained.

Above are the reasons of my short order
of the even date announced in th= oven Court.

Announced bie. od
Dt: 22.2.2016 ™ —

ye

50 f4le

Fomatess ICr.A No. 55-M of 2015 The State Vs. Anwar Zeb and others;
