Judgment Sheet

PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, ABBOTTABAD BENCH.

JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT

Cr. A No.19-A of 2018
JUDGMENT

Appellant. apd Hassan) by Syed lial meals Advocates...
Respondent...(The State etc) . vee te eee betes eset tee es

2K OK OK OK

SYED MUHAMMAD _ATTIQUE SHAH, _J:-

This appeal under Section 417(2-A) Cr.P.C is directed
against acquittal of accused/respondents Mir Wali, Said
Wali, Mir Alam sons of Awal Khan, Gul Jehan, Zahir
Shah sons of Jamal and Muhammad Nabi son of Akram
Khan, in case I’.I.R No.120 dated 10.06.2016 under
section 302/324/506/148/149 registered against them in
Police Station Dobair, District Kohistan, by the learned
Sessions Judge, Kohistan, vide his judgment dated

10.01.2018.

N

Learned counsel for the — appellant
vehemently argued that the impugned order of acquittal
of the learned trial Court is against the material available
on record of the case and the law applicable thereto and

the inference drawn by the learned Sessions Judge are
N

based on presumption, surmises and conjectures; that
where evidence on the record was credible and despite
production of confidence inspiring and reliable evidence
to establish the case of the prosecution, the learned trial
Court acquitted the respondents on the basis of minor
discrepancies, technicalities; that acquittal of respondents
through impugned judgment is against the settled
principle of administration of criminal justice, as the
learned trial Court failed to appreciate material evidence
in its true perspective.

B. Arguments of learned counsel for the
appellant heard and record perused.

4, Perusal of record would reveal that the
report. of the occurrence was lodged by
complainant/petitioner Abdul Hassan on 10/06/2016 at
17.30 hours to the effect that at about 14.30 hours, he
alongwith Sher Bahadur and Mir Alam was going to
Jejial Bazar from their house, when they reached near
‘Kaar Jejial’, they saw Mir Wali PTC Teacher, Mir
Alam, and Said Wali PTC Teacher duly armed with
firearms, sitting there, who on secing them started
abusing and started firing to kill them, as a result of firing

of Mir Wali, Mir Alam sustained injury, while with the
firing of Said Wali, the complainant sustained injury on
his head, whereas, Sher Bahadur sustained injury on his
head with the firing of Mir Alam. He further alleged in
his report that accused/respondents Muhammad Nabi,
Zahir Shah and Gul Jehan duly armed with firearms and
accompanying them, also made firing to frighten them.
Motive for the offence was stated to be quarrel between
Sher Bahadur and Mir Alam accused/respondent. ‘The
occurrence was stated to have also witnessed by Sher
Zaman and Shah Alam. Mir Alam, injured was later on
succumbed to his injuries, when he was being taken to
Abbottabad for treatment.

5 The occurrence was allegedly committed at
14.30 hours on 10.06.2016.07.2015 and the report was
lodged on the spot at 17.30 hours, afier delay of three
hours, whereas, the police station was situated at a
distance of 8/9 kms from the spot. The peculiar facts and
circumstances of the case would suggest that the case
was registered after preliminary investigation after duc
deliberation and consultation and no independent witness
has been produced despite the fact that the occurrence
had taken place on a busy road at 14.30 hours. ‘The star

witnesses of the prosecution in this case are injured-
complainant Abdul Hassan (PW-6) and injured Sher
Bahadur (PW-7), who appeared before the Icarned trial
Court and furnished their testimony as cyewitnesses of
the occurrence. The complainant in his report has
attributed the role of firing to each of the accused/
respondents, which resulted in injurics to a_ specific
injured person, however, this Court believes that when
indiscriminate firing is being made by three persons, no
one can distinguish their role with exactitude as to whose
lire shot hit to whom. Moreover, the 1.0. Razeem Shah
(PW-9) has shown accused/respondents Mir Wali, Said
Wali and Mir Alam at points No.6, 7 and 8, respectively,
in the site plan (Ex.PB), however, nine emptics of 7.62.
bore were recovered from point ‘A’, which is adjacent to
point No.6, where, Mir Alam, accused/respondent was
shown standing, at the time of alleged occurrence and no
empty was found from the places of other
accused/respondents. ‘The prosecution has failed to
resolve this anomaly by producing cogent, reliable and
confidence inspiring evidence, which means, that the
occurrence had not taken place in the mode and manner
as alleged by the prosecution. “The empties of 7.62 bore

recovered {rom the spot were sent to the firearms expert
alongwith firearms recovered from possession of
accused/respondents Zahir Shah and Mir Wali, however,
the report was received in negative. ‘The postmortem
examination of the deceased was not conducted due to
the tradition in vogue in Kohistan. The injuries on the
persons of injured PW-6 and 7, Abdul Ilassan
complainant and Sher Bahadur were not caused with
firearms, as per opinion of Dr. Muhammad Geer (PW-1).
‘Thus, the very presence of PW-6 and PW-7 on the spot at
the relevant time become doubtful. Thus, the above
mentioned contradictions, discrepancies in the statements
of the prosecution witnesses would lead to the obvious
inference that it was an unseen occurrence and the
alleged eyewitnesses were not present on the spot at the
time of occurrence and the respondents were charged due
to previous enmity.

6. The learned trial Court has committed no
error in acquitting the respondents by extending the
benefit of doubt. It is settled that even a single doubt, if
found reasonable, is sufficient to justify acquittal of an
accused. In the absence of truthful, trustworthy, reliable

and confidence inspiring evidence, the learned trial Court
6

has rightly acquitted the accused/ respondents of the
charge.
7 The Apex Court, in case titled ‘Zaheer
Sadig Vs. Muhammad Ijaz and others (2017 SCMR
2007) has once again pressed into service the golden
principle of presumption of double innocence, in the
following manner:
“Even otherwise, it is well settled by now
that in criminal cases every accused is
innocent unless proven guilty and upon
acquittal by a court of competent
jurisdiction such presumption doubles.
Very SION and cogent reasons are
required to dislodge such presumption.”

Reliance in this respect is also placed on 2017 SCMR

1710 and 2017 SCMR 1639.

8. Kor the reasons discussed above, this appeal being

without substance is dismissed in /imine.

—

JUDGE

Announced.
Dt. 29/11/2018.

/*M.Saleem*/

(DB) Mr. Justice Lal Jan Khattan and Mr. Justice Syed Muhammad Attique Shah
