Judgment Sheet

PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
ABBOTTABAD BENCH.
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT

Cr.M.Q No.22-A of 2017
JUDGMENT
Datte of hearing... 2. ccc cec cece LBOT QOD coc cee cee cee cee cen tee tee tenes cee en tee cen cee eee en aees
Appellant...(Ahmad Shah) by Mr. Ghulam Mustafa Khan Swati, Advocate... ........

Respondent...(Agriculture Inspector, SMS Plant Protection, Agriculture Department
Mansehra etc) by Mr. Yasir Zahoor Abbasi, Assistant Advocate
General .......

SYED MUHAMAMD ATTIQUE SHAH, J:-

Through instant petition under section 561-A
Cr.P.C, petitioner, Ahmad Shah, is seeking
quashment of order dated 29.05.2017 vide
which the revision petition filed by petitioner
for de-sealing of shop was dismissed by
Additional Sessions Judge-V, Mansehra, in case
F.1.R No.1090 dated 28.09.2016 under Sections
419/420 PPC read with section 20 sub-section
(a),(b) and (c ) of the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa
Fertilizer Control Act, 1999.

2. Brief facts leading to institution

of instant petition are that Agriculture
Inspector/respondent No.1 alongwith local
police under supervision of Additional
Assistant Commissioner, Mansehra raided a
basement in Mashhadi Plaza, opposite Yaseen
Academy Doraha Mansehra on 28.09.2016 and
has recovered fake fertilizer, a case was
registered against Saif Ali etc and the
basement alongwith fertilizer was sealed.
Thereafter, present petitioner moved an
application to Senior Civil Judge/Judicial
Magistrate, Mansehra for de-sealing of
premises and shifting of fertilizer therefrom.
The said application was dismissed by learned
Senior Civil Judge/Judicial | Magistrate,
Mansehra vide order dated 30.03.2017.
Aggrieved thereof, the petitioner filed revision
petition against the said order, which was
dismissed by learned Additional Sessions
Judge-V, Mansehra vide order dated
29.05.2016. Hence, the present petition

before this Court.
4. Learned counsel for petitioner
argued that petitioner is not an accused
person in the present case and thus has
nothing to do with the recovered fake
fertilizer, the petitioner being lawful owner of
premises has rented out the same to accused
Saif Ali, who has already been released on bail,
whereas the recovered fertilizer is still lying in
the basement owned by the petitioner right
from 28.09.2016 and respondent No.1 is not
removing/shifting the same which has created
a lot of problems for the petitioner and under
the law, respondent No.1 is required to shift
the same from the said premises, and prayed
for acceptance of the present petition.

6. Learned AAG appearing on behalf
of respondent, however, controverted the
contentions of the learned counsel for
petitioner and stated that the present
petitioner was in league with the main

accused, who has dumped the fake fertilizer in
the premises and therefore the respondent
No.1 has sealed the same in accordance with
the law. In this respect he referred to section
23 of the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Fertilizer
Control Act, 1999 and to Rule 24(5) of the
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Fertilizer Control Rules,
2003 and argued that the respondent No.1 is
legally authorized to keep under seal the fake
fertilizer under provisions of ibid rules, which
cannot be removed from there unless and until
the trial is concluded. Learned AAG prayed for
dismissal of the present petition.

7. Arguments of learned counsel
for petitioner and learned AAG heard and
record perused with their able assistance.

8. Perusal of record reveals that
present petitioner is not involved in any
manner in storing, selling or manufacturing of
fake fertilizer nor he has been made accused in
the present case by respondent No.1.

Moreover, there is also no previous history of
the petitioner’s involvement and indulgence in
such like matters. It is also revealed from
record of the present case that main accused
Saif Ali has been released on bail by the
competent Court of law and the complainant
has not sought for the cancellation of his bail.
8. Now moving on to the provision
of sub-rule (5) of Rule 24 of the Rules (ibid),
wherein, it is provided that:

“24. Duties of _Inspector.--- An

inspector may, within the local limits
of the area for which he is appointed:

(5) Any fertilizer or fertilizer
material seized can be kept or
stored in the building or place,
where it was seized or can be
removed to any other place.”
In view of above rule, the respondent-
Inspector can either store the recovered
fertilizer in the same building or place or to

remove it to any other place. However, in the

present case, as the present petitioner is not
involved in any manner with the fake fertilizer
and he has only rented out the basement to
the main accused in the case, who has
admitted this fact in his statement recorded
under section 161 Cr.P.C. Therefore, keeping
the seized fertilizer for indefinite period in the
said premises is highly unjustified, by not
shifting the same, the respondent No.1 has
deprived the petitioner from lawful use of his
property. Moreover, there is no provision in
the Act and the Rules (ibid), which gives the
respondent power and authority to seal the
premises from where fake fertilizer is
recovered. Thus, in view of peculiar facts
and circumstances of the present case, it is
held that the findings rendered by both the
Courts below are not based on _ proper
appreciation of material available on record of
the case, and the law applicable thereto, thus

warranting interference by this Court in its
inherent jurisdiction provided under section
561-A Cr.P.C.

9. Therefore, Keeping in view the
above stated facts and circumstances and
discussions made thereupon, the present petition
is accepted and respondent No.1 is directed to
shift/remove the fertilizer lying in the basement
owned by the petitioner within thirty days from
today and hand over the premises to the
petitioner.

JUDGE

Announced.

Dt.13/07/2017.
*/M. S.Awan/*
