JUDGMENT SHEET
PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, ABBOTTABAD BENCH

JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT
Cr.Mise.B.A.No.360-A/2020
JUDGMENT

Date of hearing... 2.00. .10 ce L4-O5-2020 00. oe ec cece cents tee en teens

Petitioner (s)...(Khan Afsar) by M/s Shad Muhammad Khan
and Junaid Anwar Khan, Advocates... .......

Respondent (s).....(The State etc) by M/S Sardar Muhammad
Asif, AAG, Ghulam Mustafa Khan Swati
and Shah Nawaz Asim, Advocates........

ORR 2K oR ok ok

AHMAD ALI, J.- Khan Afsar son of Muhammad
Akbar, accused-petitioner, seeks his post arrest bail in
case FIR No.35 dated 13.01.2020 for offences under
Sections 302/324/337-A(i)/427/452/34 PPC, registered at

Police Station, Ghari Habibullah, District Mansehra.

2. The report of the occurrence was lodged by
complainant Mst. Saira Ajmal on 13.01.2020 at 22.25
hours in the Emergency Ward of Civil Hospital, Ghari
Habibullah, where she brought the dead body of her
deceased husband, Muhammad Ajmal son of Miskeen
alongwith injured Mst. Nazima Shaheen, sister of her
husband, wherein, she stated that at 09.50 PM, the main

gate of the house was knocked, she opened the gate and
saw that Khan Afsar (accused-petitioner) son of
Muhammad Akbar alongwith his brothers, Arif and
Akram, their co-villagers and Wagar Shah alias Shah Ji
were standing, who asked her to send Ajmal outside, she
turned back inside, they all four duly armed with firearms
followed her inside the house. Khan Afsar made firing,
which hit his husband who sustained injuries to his
abdomen, left leg and ear and died on the spot, while Arif
made firing with which sister of her husband, Mst.
Nazima Shaheen received an injury on his left wrist;
Wagar Shah alias Shah Ji also injured Mst. Nazima
Shaheen on his right leg with a sharp object, while
Akram gave a stick blow to complainant on her head.
Besides her, the occurrence was seen by Mst. Nazima
Shaheen and mother-in-law, Mst. Rehmat-un-Nisa. After
the occurrence, the accused ran away from the spot. The
motive for the occurrence is stated to be enmity between
the parties due to divorce of Mst. Nazima Shaheen by
brother of Khan Afsar. Accordingly, FIR ibid was
registered against the accused.

3. Arguments of the learned counsel for the
parties heard at great length and record perused with their
valuable assistance.

4. Perusal of record reveals that the occurrence

which took place on 13.01.2020 at 9.50 PM inside the
house of deceased Muhammad Ajmal in village Porr,
Ghari Habib Ullah, District Mansehra, was reported to
the police by injured wife of deceased, Mst. Saira Ajmal
at Emergency Ward of Civil Hospital, Ghari Habib
Ullah, at 22.25 hours i.e. within 35 minutes of the
occurrence. Accused/petitioner, Khan Afsar, who during
the days of occurrence was serving as Inspector Traffic,
District Battagram, has been given the major role of
firing in the occurrence causing the death of deceased
Muhammad Ajmal. In the report, the complainant has
also charged Arif for causing firearm injury to injured
Mst. Nazima Shaheen, sister of deceased, while Akram
was charged for inflicting stick blow to complainant on
her head alongwith Wagar Shah alias Shah Ji for causing
injury to Mst. Nazima Shaheen on her leg. Arif and
Akram are real brothers of present accused/petitioner,
while Wagar Shah alias Shah Ji is personal servant of the
petitioner.

5. Accused/petitioner obtained bail before
arrest from the Court of Additional Sessions Judge,
Balakot, Camp Court at Mansehra on 18.01.2020,
wherein, he raised plea of alibi and stated that at the
relevant time, he alongwith his friends gunman and
driver was proceeding to Islamabad in their motorcars

bearing registration Number AFX-006 and LE-435, both
white colour via Motorways through Havelian-Shah
Magqsood, Chechian-Islamabad Interchanges. In this
regard, the police during investigation took into
possession three USBs containing CCTV footages
regarding entry and exit of said motorcars from the
concermed Interchanges.

6. Subsequently, during investigation co-
accused Waqar Shah alias Shah Ji was arrested on
16.01.2020, who recorded his confessional statement,
wherein, he stated that on 12.01.2020 there was marriage
of one Waqas Anwar, when he reached the house of
marriage alongwith family of accused/petitioner Khan
Afsar, Ajmal and his brother Akmal were giving fists and
kicks blows to Arif, brother of accused/petitioner. He
went to rescue them but they both threatened him. A case
was registered against Ajmal and Akmal on the report of
Wagas Anwar in police station. Akmal was arrested
while Ajmal ran away. Afterwards, Ajmal came to the
house of Arif and threatened them of dire consequences.
He further stated that he alongwith co-accused Arif and
Akram duly armed with ‘kalashinkov’ and sticks planned
to visit the house of deceased Ajmal on 13.01.2020.
Akram knocked the gate and they heard the voice of
Ajmal from inside, who after hearing our voice started

firing from inside, while he also started firing with
‘kalashinkov’ from outside, as a result, Ajmal hit and
died while his sister sustained injuries.

7. In this backdrop, this Court would like to
dilate upon the plea of alibi taken by _ the
accused/petitioner. ‘Alibi’ or ‘plea of alibi’ is a claim of
innocence brought forth by the accused in which he
alleges that at the time when the offence with which he is
charged was committed, he was elsewhere. Plea of alibi
is the weakest type of plea and cannot be given
any weightage unless same is proved through very
cogent, convincing and plausible evidence therefore,
setting up a false plea of alibi does not lead to an
inference of guilt but at the same time it can be a
confirmatory circumstance to prove the guilt. The burden
of substantiating the plea of alibi and making it
reasonably probable lies on the person who sets it up 1.e.
accused and this burden is heavy and strict. In ‘Said
Akbar Vs. Gul Akbar and another’ (1996 SCMR 931),
the Apex Court has held that:-

“It is true that in such cases when bail is
sought on the basis of a particular plea, the
Court considering the bail plea has, to
make tentative assessment of evidence
proposed to be produced by the prosecution
and all material available on the record
including material in support of defence
plea, which is to be placed in juxtaposition
with material in support of prosecution
case to arrive at conclusion whether bail
should be granted or not.”
8. As earlier stated that the evidence collected
by the I.O during investigation is the CCTV footages
from the concerned authorities, however, in the stated
footages only vehicles are visible, while the faces of the
person travelling in those vehicles are not visible.
Admittedly, the accused/petitioner is a police officer 1.e.
Inspector and was posted in Battagram as Inspector in
Traffic Branch during the days of occurrence. As per his
version he was on leave on eventful day with the
permission of the D.P.O, but nothing was available on
record in black & white regarding the leave. A
departmental inquiry is being initiated against him and he
has been suspended from service by the competent
authority. In past there was registered a case against him
in PS Kot Najibullah District Haripur under section 322
PPC for causing ‘Qatl-Bissabab’ of a person during
investigation when he was posted as SHO PS Kot
Najibullah. It was the plea of accused/petitioner that at
the relevant time he was travelling with his friends,
driver and gunman in their motorcars and stayed at night
in Islamabad where they met many others. All these
friends, gunner and driver including inmates of the Flat at
Islamabad submitted their affidavits and recorded
statements in line with the plea of alibi of the

accused/petitioner. Similarly, Call Data Record
pertaining to different cell numbers including the
accused/petitioner was also brought on record.

9. On the other hand, the case of the
prosecution is supported by eyewitnesses account
furnished by injured P.Ws, medical evidence and other
circumstantial evidence. The occurrence was taken place
inside the house of deceased and both the parties are
closely related to each other i.e. deceased was first cousin
of present accused/petitioner and one injured witness
Mst. Nazima Shaheen was divorced by brother (not
charged in this case) of the accused/petitioner. The
accused/petitioner and others were duly identified in the
light of bulb installed at the spot and was also recovered
during investigation. So far as the argument of the
learned counsel for the accused-petitioner that co-
accused Wagar Shah alias Shah Ji has committed the
offence and in this regard he confessed his guilt is
concemed, no empties were recovered from outside the
gate from where firing was made on the deceased. All
the recoveries of 7.62 bore were made from inside the
gate, which as per firearms expert report matched with
the ‘kalashinkov’ recovered on the pointation of co-
accused. Though the I.O has showed holes in the gate
from both sides but no empty allegedly fired by deceased

from inside could be recovered. The accused/petitioner
obtained bail before arrest after five days of the

occurrence and then he taken the plea of ‘alibi’. In case

of ‘Iqbal-ur-Rehman_Vs.__The_State’(PLD 1974

Supreme Court 83), the august Apex Court has
observed that:

“We have no intention of recording any
finding as to the truth o otherwise of the
plea of alibi raised on behalf of the
respondent Iltafu Rehman, as that is the
function of the trial Court. All that we are
called upon to examine at this stage is
whether this was a case where there were,
or not, reasonable grounds for believing
that the respondent was guilty of an
offence punishable with death or
transportation for life.”

Similarly in the case of ‘Bahadur Vs. Muhammad Latif

and _ others’(1987 SCMR 788), the same principle has

been annunciated, in the following words:-

“We heard the learned counsel for the
parties and have gone through the
impugned judgment of the learned High
Court as also the reasons given for rejection
of bail by the learned Sessions Judge. There
is no denying the fact that the respondent
Muhammad Latif is directly charge in the
F.LR. for having killed Muhammad Munir
with a rifle shot. The F.I.R. was promptly
lodged within 45 minutes by the petitioner.
As respects the contention that the
Investigating Officer had found the plea to
alibi to be correct, it was contended by the
learned counsel for the petitioner, that in
fact both the respondents have since then
been challaned for the commission of the
offence. This fact was not controverted by
the learned counsel for the respondents and
was confirmed by the learned Assistant
Advocate-General. It is needless to comment
that the alleged theory of alibi has still to
stand the test of scrutiny on the basis of
evidence.”
In case titled ‘Muhammad Afzal Vs. The State’(2012

SCMR 707), the Honourable Supreme Court of Pakistan
has held that:-

“Learned counsel for the petitioner only
pressed into service the alleged alibi that
the petitioner being an employee of
Daewoo Company, was at Sargodha and
not at his house at Jhang at the time of
occurrence. The High Court has rightly
observed that this is a matter, the veracity
whereof will be determined at the trial.

In view of the foregoing discussion, we find
no justification for differing with the High
Court and granting bail to the petitioner.
This petition is, therefore, dismissed and
leave is declined”.

10. This Court considers that it is for the trial
Court to determine the veracity of confession of the co-
accused, ocular account of the eyewitnesses coupled with
medical and circumstantial evidence as well as defence
evidence and draw its conclusion in light thereof. This
Court at this stage on tentative assessment of the material
placed on record is not inclined to grant bail to the
accused/petitioner. The offence squarely falls within the
prohibitory limb of Section 497 Cr.P.C.

11. Needless to mention here that the
observations made above are purely tentative in nature
and should in no way prejudice the case of either party
during trial. In this regard, reliance is placed on case law
reported in (1996 SCMR 1845) wherein it has been held

that:-
10

“However we would like to point out
in no certain terms that the
observations made by the High Court
in the orders granting bail and by us
in this order are confined to tentative
assessment made for the purpose of
disposal of bail applications and not
intended to influence the mind of the
trial Court, which is free to appraise
the evidence strictly according to its
merits and the law of the time of
disposal of the case, which of course,
needless to say, is the function of the
trial Court”.

12. For what has been discussed above, this bail
petition being bereft of merit, is dismissed accordingly.
Dt. 14-05-2020.

JUDGE

M.Saleem/*

(SB) Mr. Justice Ahmad Ali
