JUDGMENT SHEET
PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, ABBOTTABAD BENCH

JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT
Cr.Mise.B.A.No.160-A/2017
JUDGMENT
Date of hearing................. 17-05-2017.............25
Petitioner (s)... (Sher Afzal etc) by M/S Ghulam
Mustafa Khan Swati and Saeed

Ahmad Shah Mashadi, Advocates.

Respondent (s).....(The State etc) by M/S and Shad
Muhammad Khan, Advocates.....

ORR 2K oR ok ok

SYED MUHAMMAD ATTIQUE SHAH, _J.-

Accused-petitioners Sher Afzal and Munawar alias
Boi, after having been refused bail by the learned
lower Court in case FIR No.21, dated 11.04.1992
under sections 302/34 of Pakistan Penal Code, 1860,
registered at Police Station Banna Allai, District
Battagram, have approached this Court for the same
relief by filing the instant bail petition.

2. The allegation against the accused-

petitioners, as reveals from the report of Muhammad
Ibrahim son of Muhammad Hassan _ Khan,
complainant is that they both in furtherance of their
common intention committed Qatl-i-Amd_ of
Muhammad Hassan Khan, father of complainant on
10.04.1992 at 0300 hours in village Shalai by firing at
him.

3. Arguments of the learned counsel for the
parties heard and the record perused with their
valuable assistance.

4. Perusal of record would reveal that no
doubt, the present accused/petitioners are directly
charged in the FIR by the complainant for committing
Qatl-i-Amd of his father but at the same time,
complainant is not an eyewitness of the occurrence
and the report lodged by him before the police at his
home after delay of about twenty five hours is based
on the information furnished to him by Chan Sair.
Though the said Chan Sair has been shown as an
eyewitness of the occurrence in the F.I.R. but the role
of firing attributed to both the accused/petitioners in
the commission of alleged offence by the said witness
Chan Sair and the complainant, would be subject to
scrutiny at the trial, especially when postmortem of
the deceased has not been conducted. Moreover, the

site plan is also not in support of the prosecution case.
Admittedly, nothing incriminating has been recovered
from the accused/petitioners. Moreover, at the
moment, no direct or circumstantial evidence is
available on the record connecting the accused/
petitioners with the commission of alleged offence.
The fact that the accused/petitioners took the police
party to the place of occurrence cannot upset the case
of the accused/petitioners for grant of bail to them, as
the same was already known to the prosecution. There
is also cross version of the occurrence lodged by the
accused party vide FIR No.22 against Shoaib Khan,
brother of the present complainant. In peculiar facts
and circumstances of the case in hand, the only
ground which could come in the way of the present
accused/petitioners is their long standing un-explained
abscondance. But, it is by now settled that mere
absconsion on the part of an accused would be not
sufficient when otherwise a case for bail in view of
the peculiar facts and circumstances of that particular
case is made out in his favour. In this regard, reliance
can be placed on Mitho Pitafi’s case (2009 SCMR
299), Ehsanullah’s case (2012 SCMR 1137), Ikram-
ul-Haq’s case (2012 SCMR 1273) and Qamar alias
Mitho’s Case (PLD 2012 SC 222). Thus, this Court

considers that in view of facts and circumstances
referred to above, a case of ‘further inquiry’ into the
guilt of the accused/petitioners is made out in their
favour, as contemplated in subsection 2 of section 497
Cr.P.C.

5. The observations of this Court rendered
hereinabove, would not affect the case of the
accused/petitioner during the trial, in any manner
whatsoever.

6. Consequently, this bail application is
accepted and Sher Afzal son of Kareem Dad and
Munawar alias Boi son of Kareem Dad, accused-
petitioners are admitted to bail, subject to their
furnishing bail bonds in the sum of Rs.100,000/-
(Rupees one lac), each, with two sureties each in the
like amount, to the satisfaction of the ///aqa/Duty

Magistrate, Battagram.

Dt.17-05-2017. JUDGE

M.Saleem/*
