JUDGMENT SHEET
PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
ABBOTTABAD BENCH.
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT

Cr.M BA No. 171-A/2020
Mujahid Vs The State

Date of hearing: 09.04.2020

Petitioner (Mujahid) by: Mr. Sultan Muhammad Khan
Tanoli, Advocate.

State by; Raja Muhammad Zubair, AAG.

Complainant by: Mr. Naseer Ahmed Khan, Advocate.

JUDGMENT
ORK

AHMAD ALI, J. Through the instant petition, the
petitioner (Mujahid S/o Rasheed), seeks his post-arrest bail
in case FIR No. 01 dated 01.01.2020 u/s 377/355PPC read
with Section 53 CPA, PS Sherwan, (Abbottabad).

2. Complainant Walidad Khan reported the
matter to the local police alleging therein that his son
Zeeshan Khan aged about 10/11 years disclosed that he
went to take back his pigeon from one Mujahid who took
him inside his house where he committed unnatural act
with him and also recorded his video. Thereafter he put a
currency note of Rs. 100/- in the pocket of victim and

threatened him not to disclose the occurrence to anyone
Page 2 of 4

otherwise he would kill him and would upload the video on
the internet. On the report of complainant, FIR was lodged
against the accused.

3. Arguments of learned counsel for the parties
have been heard in detail and available record gone
through.

4, Perusal of record reveals that the accused-
petitioner was directly charged in the promptly lodged FIR.
The victim and the accused, being co-villager are known to
each other and there is no question of misidentification.
There is no ill will between the parties to falsely charge the
accused/petitioner. Report of FSL supports prosecution
version at the moment. The mobile phone through which
the accused/petitioner has allegedly recorded video, has
also been recovered upon his pointation.

5. The victim in his statement recorded under Section
164 Cr.P.C has charged the accused/petitioner, endorsing
the contents of FIR. The currency note allegedly put by the
accused in the pocket of victim was also produced before
the police and taken into possession through recovery
memo. A minor child of 11/12 years of age has been
allegedly subjected to immoral act and recording his video

further increases the gravity of the offence. The offence
Page 3 of 4

falls within the prohibitory clause of Section 497 Cr.P.C.
Moreover, as per learned AAG as well as learned counsel
for the complainant, the video recorded by the
accused/petitioner was uploaded on the internet.

6. So far as applicability of section 53 of the Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa Child Protection and Welfare Act, 2010
(hereinafter to be referred as the Act of 2010), is concerned,
the definition of the "Child at risk" as contemplated under
section 2(1)(e) of the Act coupled with the facts and
circumstances of the instant case, itis ascertained that the
alleged victim falls under the definition of "child at risk".
In such eventuality, the applicability of section 53 of the
Act of 2010, to the case of petitioner, is fully justified,
which is, in fact, non bail-able.

Vs Even, otherwise, the offence for which the accused
petitioner is charged is too heinous and of moral turpitude,
affecting the society in general and the life of an innocent
victim in particular being stigmatized at the very early
stage. The prosecution as well as Courts of law can play a
vital role in curtailing such crimes while applying the true
judicial mind to the governing judicature.

8. Before parting with this order, this court finds it

necessary to mention that all the observations recorded
Page 4 of 4

above are tentative assessment just for the disposal of bail
petition and not intended to influence the mind of trial
Court, which is free to appraise the evidence strictly in
accordance with law and merits of the case. Guidance could
be sought from case law reported in 1996 SCMR 1845,

9. For what has been discussed above, instant bail
being without any merit stands dismissed.

Announced
09.04.2020

JUDGE

Tufali. /* SB Mr. Justice Ahmad Ali
