Judgment Sheet

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
ABBOTTABAD BENCH.

(Judicial Department)

Cr.M BA No. 82-A/2020
Hashim Ali Vs the State

Date of hearing: 21.02.2020
Petitioner Hashim Ali by: Mr. Dildar Khan, Advocate.

State by: Sardar Muhammad Asif, AAG.

Nemo for the compliant despite service.

JUDGMENT

Jo
AHMAD ALI, J. Through the instant petition, the
petitioner (Hashim Ali S/o Nisar Ahmed), has sought his
post arrest bail, in case FIR No. 1026 dated 28.08.2019
under sections 324/34 PPC read with Section 15 AA
KPK, P.S. Kot Najibullah (Harpur). Same relief was,
however, declined to him by the learned Trial Court, vide
order dated 21.12.2019.

2. Brief facts of the case as contended in the FIR are
that injured complainant (Sajid S/o Manzoor Elahi)
accompanied by his injured son Usama Ali reported the
matter to the local police to the effect that his son in law

Hashim Ali visited their house, had lunch and at about
02:30 PM, he asked his wife Mst. Kainat Kiran to
accompany him. She refused upon which he tried to take
her along forcibly. Upon intervention of the complainant,
Hashim Ali took out knife from the folds of his trouser
and inflicted blows to complainant on left forearm.
Usama Ali, son of the complainant came to rescue the
complainant who was also injured by the accused by
inflicting knife blow on right side of his chest and right
arm. Motive for the occurrence was strained relations
between the accused and daughter of the complainant.

3. Arguments of the learned counsel for the petitioner
as well as learned AAG heard and record of the case
gone through.

4. Perusal of record reveals that the alleged
occurrence took place on 28.08.2019 while the
accused/petitioner was arrested on the next date of
occurrence i.e. 29.08.2019 but the crime knife was still in
the folds of his trouser, which was still blood stained.
This fact makes the case of prosecution as one of further
inquiry, as it is the anxiety of the accused to get rid of
crime weapon as soon as possible.

5. Besides, as per medical report of Medical Officer,

RHC Kot Najibullah, dated 28.08.2019, the injuries
found on the body of complainant were skin deep, while
the injuries on the body of injured Usama have though
been shown to be bone exposed, however, the nature of
wounds is not mentioned. Keeping in view the injuries
mentioned in both the MLCs, the question as to whether
Section 324 PPC is applicable or not, is a question of
further inquiry.

6. The accused/petitioner has been arrested on
29.08.2019 and since then is behind the bars. The challan
in the instant case is complete. The trial has commenced
and the case is posted for 05.03.2020 for prosecution
evidence. Accused/petitioner as per available record is
neither a previous convict nor hardened or disparate
criminal. Similarly, there is no allegation that the offence
was committed in the name or on the pretext of honour,
as such the question as to whether the punishment of
Ta’azir could be passed against him or not, keeping in
view the provisions of Section 337 N(2) PPC, makes the
case of accused/petitioner one of further inquiry.

7. In the case of Amir Vs the State (PLD 1972 SC
277) it was held that, “for purposes of bail, law not to be
stretched in favour of prosecution. Benefit of doubt, if

any arising, must go to the accused even at bail stage”.
Similar view was taken in the case of Manzoor Vs the
State (PLD 1972 SC 81). These principles so laid down,
are based on enunciation of law in interpreting the
provision of section 497, Cr.P.C and broader principle of
justice. Till date, no departure or deviation has been
made there-from by this Court then, these are the
principles of law and have binding effect; and shall be
construed as guiding principles by all the Courts in the
matter of grant or refusal of bail.

8. In the circumstances, case of accused will require
further probe to establish his involvement in the
commission of the offence through reliable evidence as
provided under Sub-Section (2) of Section 497 Cr.P.C.

9. Even otherwise, to curtail the liberty of a person
was a serious step in law, therefore, the judges should
apply judicial mind with deep thought for reaching at a
fair and proper conclusion albeit tentatively. Such
exercise should not be carried out in vacuum or in a
flimsy and casual manner as that would defeat the ends
of justice because if the accused charged, was ultimately
acquitted at the trial then no reparation or compensation
could be awarded to him for the long incarceration, as the

provisions of Criminal Procedure Code and the scheme
of law on the subject did not provide for such
arrangements to repair the loss, caused to an accused
person, detained in jail without just cause and reasonable
grounds. Wisdom can safely be derived from case law
reported in 2016 SCMR 18.

10. Moreso, it has also been held time and again by the
august Supreme Court that bail does not mean acquittal
of accused but only change of custody from Government
agencies to the sureties, who on furnishing bonds take
responsibility to produce the accused whenever and
wherever required to be produced. Reliance could be
placed on case reported in 2008 SCMR_ 807 “Haji
Muhammad Nazir Vs State”.

11. Before parting with this order, this court finds it
necessary to mention that all the observations recorded
above are tentative assessment just for the disposal of
bail petition and not intended to influence the mind of
trial Court, which is free to appraise the evidence strictly
in accordance with law and merits of the case and; as per
law laid down in (1996 SCMR 1845).

12. For what has been discussed above and on
tentative assessment of material available on record a

case arguable for the grant of bail is made out.
Resultantly, this petition is allowed and the accused-
petitioner, named above, is admitted to bail, provided he
furnishes bail bonds in the sum of Rs.100,000/- with two
sureties each in the like amount to the satisfaction of
learned Illaqa Judicial/Duty Magistrate concerned, who
shall ensure that the sureties are local, reliable and men
of means.

Announced:
21.02.2020

JUDGE

Tufail/ SB Hon'ble Mr. Justice Ahmad Ali
