JUDGMENT SHEET

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, ABBOTTABAD BENCH

JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT

Cr.R No: 37-A of 2015

JUDGMENT
Date Of N@€ring.............ccecccecceeeceeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeneeeeeeee
Appellant(s)/Petitioner (S).........::c::cceceeceeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeees

RESPONCeNet (S)........cecceeceeccececeeeeeeeeeceeeeeeeeeeseeeeeseeeseeees

2K OK KKK

QALANDAR ALI KHAN,J:- This revision
petition by accused/petitioner, Najab
Nawaz Khan, has arisen out of order of the
learned trial Court/Additional Sessions
Judge-II, Haripur, dated 21.11.2015,
whereby application of the
accused/petitioner for summoning
Inspector Muhammad Ashiq and Muharrir
of Police Station 1-9 Industrial Area,
Islamabad, along with record of case FIR
No.323 dated 02.09.2015 was dismissed.
The application was moved after statement
of the accused/petitioner was recorded

under Section 342 Cr.PC wherein he
declined to be examined as his own
witness under Section 340 (2) Cr.PC but
expressed the desire to produce defence
evidence. The accused/petitioner, then,
moved application for production of
defence evidence comprising the
aforementioned two government/police
officials through Court. The application was
moved in case vide FIR No.868 dated
18.12.2009 under Section 302/120-B and
109 PPC Police Station City Haripur, which
was lodged on the report of the
accused/petitioner as complainant wherein
unknown accused were charged for the
Qatl-i-Amd of his father Akhtar Nawaz
Khan, mother Mst. Sardar Akhtar Bibi and
servant Khan Afsar.

2. Arguments of the learned
counsel for the accused/petitioner, learned
Additional Advocate General and learned
counsel for respondent No.2 heard, and

record perused.
3. The relevant provision of law
governing compelling the attendance of
any witness for examination or production
of any document is 265-F (7) Cr.PC, which
lays down as under:

“If the accused or any one or
several accused, after entering
on his defence, applies to the
Court to issue any process for
compelling the attendance of any
witness for examination or the
production of any document or

other thing, the Court shall issue

such process unless it considers

that the application is made for

the purpose of vexation or delay
or defeating the ends of justice
such ground shall be recorded by

the Court in writing.”
(Emphasis provided)

4. The above clear provision of law
leaves no doubt about powers of the Court
to decline issuance of process for
attendance of a witness if it is of the
opinion that the application is made for the
purpose of vexation or delay’ or

defeating the ends of justice. The only
condition attached to the exercise of such
powers is that the Court shall record
reasons in writing for declining the
request.

5. In the instant case, the learned
trial Court has recorded elaborate reasons
for declining request of the
accused/petitioner, including, that the
accused/petitioner failed to show or
explain relevance of the proposed evidence
in the case and further that the apex Court
had conveyed directions on 20.11.2015,
whereby not only displeasure regarding
Pace and progress of the proceedings was
conveyed but a last chance was afforded
to the trial Court for conclusion of the case
within two weeks, failing which to face
contempt of Court proceedings as well as
departmental inquiry. The learned trial
Court also pointed out that certified copies
of record of case FIR No.323 dated
02.09.2015 registered at P.S 1-9

Islamabad under Section 13 of the Arms
Ordinance, 1965 would show that the case
was decided by the Court of learned
Judicial Magistrate on 16.09.2015 as a
result of plead guilty by accused in the
case namely Aqeel Khan. The learned trial
Court held that no investigation of the said
case was pending nor such proceedings
had any relevance to the case.

6. In his drive to persuade the
Court to summon defence witnesses, the
learned counsel for the accused/petitioner
referred to judgments reported as 2007
P.Cr.LJ 24 (Lahore), PLD 2011 Federal
Shariat Court 114, 2015 YLR 782 (Lahore),
and 2015 YLR 1776 (Sindh); but perusal of
the cited judgments would reveal that the
testimony of the witnesses whose
attendance was sought in the cases for
recording their statements was, indeed,
relevant to the cases, which is not the case
here, as no relevancy of statement under
Section 161 Cr.PC of an accused in

another case under Section 13/20/65-AO
has been shown to warrant summoning of
the Inspector and Muharrir of the Police
Station where the case was registered. The
accused/petitioner did not offer himself to
be examined as his own witness under
Section 340(2) Cr.PC and establish his
defence, neither he could produce his
witnesses in support of plea raised by him
in his defence.

7. No doubt, the law empowers the
Court to issue process on the request of
the defence for attendance and
examination of defence evidence, but the
powers in this regard have been made
subject to the discretion of the Court to
seek whether the application was aimed at
advancing the ends of justice or moved
only for vexation or delay or defeating the
ends of justice. In this case, the design of
delaying conclusion of trial, despite clear
direction for trial of the case on daily basis,
is evident from the successive order sheets

in the case by the trial Court, showing
delay in the conclusion of trial mostly due
to the conduct of the accused/petitioner.
Had there been no such attempt on the
part of the accused/petitioner in the past,
his application could have evoked a
positive response from the Court, but
keeping in view his track record, the
accused/petitioner disentitled him for
indulgence of the Court, and his request in
this regard was rightly turned down by the
trial Court. In short, the learned trial Court
correctly exercised the authority/powers
vested in it by the law; and the impugned
order, therefore, does not call for
interference by this Court in its revisional
jurisdiction.

8. The revision petition is without
substance, hence dismissed.

Announced:

01.12.2015
JUDGE
