ail.
JUDGMENT SHEET
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
MINGORA BENCH (DAR-UL-QAZA), SWAT
(Judicial Department)
Cr.R No. 89-M/2018

Sultani Room s/o Asfandiar r/o Singpora, Tehsil Matta,
District Swat (Appellants)
Versus

1) Muhammad Inam and others
(Respondents)

Present: Mr. Abdul Jalal, Advocate for the petitioner.

Muhammad Rahim Shah, Assistant. A.G. for
State.

Mr. Siraj Ali, Advocate for the respondents.

Date of hearing: 15.05.2019

JUDGMENT

SYED ARSHAD ALT, J.- This is a criminal revision
petition filed by Sultani Room, the petitioner herein,
against the order dated 02.10.2018 rendered by
learned Sessions Judge/Zilla Qazi, Swat whereby
application of the petitioner for transfer of his
complaint case from the Court of Assistant
Commissioner, Tehsil Matta to the Court of learned

Additional Sessions Judge, Matta, was turned down.

Ze Brief facts of the case are that
Muhammad Inam (Respondent No.1) charged the
present petitioner and his other co-accused namely
Gul Bacha and Muhammad Waagas u/s 302/337-F(i)/

34 P.P.C vide case P.LR No. 670 dated 26.05.2018

Tojarnul/Ps*| SB: Hon'ble Mr, Justice Syed ARshad All
(Cr.R No, 89-M of 2018 Sultani Room Vs. Muhammad Inam ond others}
on

registered at Police Station Matta, District Swat.
Regarding the said occurrence, the present petitioner
also filed a cross case through private complaint
before Assistant Commissioner/Magistrate 1‘ Class,
Matta, wherein he charged the present respondents
under section 337-A(i), 337-F(i), 506/34 P.P.C. On
29.08.2018, the petitioner filed an application before
the learned Sessions Judge, Swat for transfer of the
complaint case from the Court of learned Assistant
Commissioner to the Court of learned Additional
Sessions Judge, Matta, where the F.I.R case was
pending, however, application of the petitioner was
turned down vide order dated 02.10.2018, hence,

this petition.

5. The learned counsel appearing on
behalf of the petitioner has argued that indeed both
the cases i.e the one which was reported through
F.LR No. 670 and the other regarding which a
private complaint was submitted before the Assistant
Commissioner, relate to one and the same
occurrence and thus proprietary demands that both
the cases should be heard by one Court as essentially

if both the cases are not heard together it may result

Tajamul/Ps*

SB: Hon'ble Mr, Justice Syed ARshad Ali
(Cr.R No. 89-M of 2018 Sultani Room Vs. Muhammad Inom and others)
Tajamul/PS*

fu
in conflicting judgments. The learned counsel relied
upon PLD 1981 Supreme Court 522, 1996 P Cr. L J
1138 [Supreme Court (AJ&K)], 1986 P Cr. L J 989
[Lahore], PLD 1995 Lahore 30 and 2008 SCMR 126.

4. On the other hand, the learned counsel
for the respondents has argued that in light of close
perusal of both the cases, not only there is difference
in times of occurrence but the places of occurrence
are also different as is evident from the site plan

prepared by Investigating Officer in the F.I.R case.

5. Arguments heard and record gone
through.
6. It is evident from the record that on

26.05.2018, the Respondent No.l namely
Muhammad Inam had reported the matter to local
police consequent upon which F.I.R No. 670 was
registered against the present petitioner and other
two co-accused who were arrested on the same day
in injured condition. They were produced before the
doctor who, after examining them, confirmed
injuries on their bodies, however, no counter F.I.R

was registered against the opposite party for the said

SB: Hon'ble Mr. Justice Syed ARshad All
(Cr.R No. 89-M of 2018 Sultani Room Vs. Muhammod Inom and others)
Tajamul/PS* | $B: Hon'ble Mr. Justice Syed ARshad Ali

-4-
injuries sustained by present petitioner and other co-

accused.

Z. It was on 29.08.2018 when the present
petitioner had filed private criminal complaint before
the Assistant Commissioner, Matta wherein he
nominated Muhammad Amin (deceased) and the
present respondents namely Muhammad Inam, Shah
Khalid and Noman (deceased) for causing injuries to
them. They are deceased and complainant in F.LR
case. In the private complaint, the date of occurrence
has been stated as 26.05.2018 whereas the time of
occurrence has been shown as 13:45 hours. The time
of occurrence and the parties mentioned in both the
cases are almost the same, however, at the moment
nothing could be said with certainty regarding the
place of occurrence being the same or otherwise
because the petitioner has not made any special

reference to it in his complaint.

8. The learned Sessions Judge has refused
the desired transfer of complaint on the grounds
firstly that the complaint case is exclusively triable
by Magistrate, thus, it would deprive either of the
parties from the right of appeal before the Court of

Sessions and secondly copy of the complaint was

(Cr.R No. 89-M of 2028 Suitani Room Vs. Muhommad Inam and others)
gh
ae

Tajamul/Ps*

ake

not annexed with the application from which it could
be confirmed that the complaint was the outcome of
the occurrence regarding which the rival side had
lodged F.LR. Bare perusal of the complaint as well
as of the F.I.R would show that both are the cross
versions of one incident in which Muhammad Amin
and Numan lost their lives while complainant
Muhammad Inam and Sajid sustained injuries on
their bodies. Investigation in the said F.ILR suggests
that the present petitioner and his co-accused had
also sustained injuries on their persons in the same
occurrence which fact can be confirmed from the
injury sheets and Madd No. 30 dated 26.05.2018

available on the file/record of F.I.R No. 670.

9. In criminal administration of justice, the
trial Judge seized of a criminal case should know
about all the attending circumstances of the offences
so that to reach at a just conclusion regarding the
roles of each individual vis-a-vis his innocence and
motive behind the offences. The trial Court while
awarding punishment has also to consider the
mitigating circumstances and this is possible only

when the versions of both the sides are before the

‘SB: Hon'ble Mr. Justice Syed ARshad Ali
{Cr.R No. 89-M of 2018 Sultani Room Vs. Muhammad Inam ond others)
wGx

Court and for this purpose the necessary documents
of the cross case are also exhibited for reaching at
the just conclusion. Apart from the above, it is
settled practice that counter cases are tried side by
side by same Court till their conclusion and
judgments are pronounced simultaneously. It was

held in “Abdul Rehman Bajwa Vs. Sultan and 09

others” (PLD 1981 Supreme Court 522) that:

“21. The question of the mode of trial of
cross-cases, one initiated through a
private complaint and the other by Police
through a challan, about the same
incident, giving different versions and
against two different sets of accused
persons, was considered by this Court in
Nur Elahi v. The State (PLD1966SC708)
and it was held that both the cases should
be tried by the same Court, one after the
other. The procedure prescribed in Nur
Elahi's case was later considered by this
Court in Zulfikar Ali Bhutto v. The State
(PLD 1979SCI). The circumstances in the
cases of Nur Elahi's and that of Zulfikar
Ali Bhutto were materially different,
inasmuch as in the last mentioned case
the accused in the private complaint as
well as the police case were the same
persons. In other words, they were not
“cross-cases' in the sense in which the
expression in generally understood. It
was, therefore, held that the procedure
prescribed in Nur Elahi's case need not be
followed invariably. We may, however,
reiterate that propriety demands that
whenever the facts or circumstances
permit, cross-case, giving two different
versions of the same incident and have

Tajamul/Ps*|

SB: Han’ble Mr. Justice Syed ARshad Ali
{(Cr.R No. 89-M of 2018 Sultani Room Vs, Muhammad inam and others)
Tajamul/PS*|

he

two different sets of accused, should be
tried by the same Court, together. As
already observed, the logic behind this
view is obvious because if the two cases
giving different versions of the same
incident are not tried together, there
would be serious likelihood of conflict in
judgments”.

The principle laid down in the above

referred judgment was followed in “Rafagat Ali Vs.

Hidayat Ali and others” (1986 P Cr. L J 989 [Lahore],

“Muhammad Mahroof Khan Vs. The State and 04

others” (1996 P Cr. L J 1138) and “Muhammad

Nadeem Vs. Additional Sessions Judge, Lahore and
others” (PLD 1995 Lahore 30).

10. The law laid down in Abdul Rehman
Bajwa case was reaffirmed by the august Supreme
Court of Pakistan in “Bashir Ahmad Vs. Haji
Muhammad Ashraf and others” (2008 SCMR_ 126)

wherein it was observed that:

“9. It is a well established practice based
on a rule of propriety that counter cases
should be tried together. This rule of
propriety has generally been followed
because the rationale is that if the counter
cases emanating from the same
transaction are tried by two different
Courts, they are likely to end up in
conflicting judgments and even the
appreciation of evidence may be
subjected to different criteria. However,
this rule of propriety is not inflexible rule

‘SB: Hon'ble Mr. Justice Syed ARshad Ali
(Cr.R No. 89-M of 2018 Sultani Room Vs. Muhammad inam and others}
= @e

and the Court may part with it for the
reasons recorded in certain situations.
One such case is Muhammad Sadiq supra
to which reference has been made by the
respondent's learned counsel”.

The learned trial Court has relied upon
the judgment delivered in the case of “Muhammad

Sadiq Vs. The State and another” (PLD 1971 SC 713)

wherein it was observed by the august Supreme

Court as under.

“The accused persons in the challan case
fully participated in the trial of that case
and defended themselves. At no stage, the
accused persons in the challan case moved
the Sessions Court to postpone its hearing
because of the counter-case i.e. the
complaint case pending in the Court of
the Magistrate. It was only after the
conclusion of the trial of the challan case
and the fixation of a date for the delivery
of judgment that the application under
section 561-A was made in order to
prevent the delivery of the judgment in
that case”.

However, the ratio of the above referred
judgment was distinguished by the august Supreme
Court of Pakistan in the Bashir Ahmad’s case Supra
by holding that the request in Muhammad Sadiq
case for trial of both the cases by one Court was

raised at a very belated stage and it was for that

reason that the request was not considered. In such

Tajamul/Ps*|

SB: Hon'ble Mr. Justice Syed ARshad Ali
(Cr.R No, 89-M of 2018 Sultan! Room Vs. Muhammad Inom and others)
4
a

Tajamul/Ps*

a
situation, in order to resolve the present controversy,
the law laid down in Bashir Ahmad case is to be

followed.

il. As far as findings of the learned Court
below that if both the cases are tried together by
Sessions Court then one of the parties may lose the
right of appeal before the said forum, suffice it to
note that the trial by the Sessions court in the
complaint case would not deprive either of the
parties from appeal which is available under sections
410 or 417 of the Criminal Procedure Code because
in case of acquittal of the accused in the complaint
case, no appeal there against would lie to Sessions
Court rather acquittal of the accused is to be
challenged before this Court under section 417 (2),
Cr.P.C. Similarly, in case of conviction of the
accused in complaint case, the convicts would be at
liberty to challenge their conviction before this
Court by way of appeal u/s 410, Cr.P.C. Indeed only
appeal if provided by statute is a vested right
whereas the parties have no vested right in a forum
of appeal. Thus, the reasons rendered by learned

Sessions Judge refusing transfer of the case are not

SB: Hon'ble Mr. Justice Syed ARshad All
(Cr.R No. 89-M of 2018 Sultan! Room Vs. Muhammad Inam ond others)
-10-
legally correct, hence, this revision petition is
allowed and the impugned order is set aside.
Resultantly, Private Complaint No. 71/AC/M of
2018 titled “Sultan-e-Rome Vs. Muhammad Amin
and 02 others” is withdrawn from the diary of
learned Assistant Commissioner, Matta and
entrusted for adjudication to the Court of learned
Additional Sessions Judge, Swat at Matta, where the
trial against the petitioner and other co-accused in
case F.I.R No. 670 dated 26.05.2018 w/s sections
302, 337-A(i)F(i)/34 is pending adjudication.
Needless to mention that the learned trial Court shall
proceed with both the cases in accordance with law

and relevant procedure.

Announced. 2
15.05.2019 a
JUDGE

He

SB: Hon'ble Mr. Justice Syed ARshad All
(Cr.R No. 89-M of 2018 Sultani Room Vs, Muhammad Inam and others)
