Criminal Appeal No:- 46 —f _/20

Abdul Sammad alias Sammad son of Misal Mu resident
of Village Mayar District Mafdan........--Accused/Appellant,

VERSUS

1)- The State.
2)- Saifullah son of Nabiullah resident of Mayar District

Mardaneseecececccccccccccecesececee Respondents,

GROUNDS OF APPEAL,
1) That the conviction and sentence of the appellant

are contrary to law and facts on the record,

2)- That there are serious contradictions in the

statements of prosecution witnesses.

3)- That the prosecution evidence does not inspire
confidence and nor the occurrence has taken place

in @ manner as given in the FIR,

4m That the medical evidence and site plan do not

corroborate the occular testimony.

5)- That the prosecution has failed to prove its

case against accused/appellant beyond doubts,

29 DEC 20%

Judgment Sheet

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
PESHAWAR

(Judicial Department)

Cr.A No. 451-P/2014.
Abdul Samad alias Samad Vs The State.

JUDGMENT
Date of hearing. 18.11.2015
Appellant by: Barrister M. Zahoorul Haq, for appellant.
Complainant by: Syed Abdul Fayaz Advocate.
State by: Mian Arshad Jan AAG.

a

MUHAMMAD _YOUNIS_THAHEEM, J:- Through
instant Criminal Appeal u/s 410 Cr.PC, Abdul Samad alias
Samad has called in question the judgment dated 10.7.2014,
handed down by learned Additional Sessions Judge-lII,
Mardan, whereby the appellant involved in case FIR
No.507 dated 23.6.2012 under Sections 302/324/34 PPC, of
P.S. Hoti (Mardan) was convicted and sentenced as under:-

Uss 302-B PPC for the murder of
deceased Nabi Ullah sentenced to

death with direction to pay
Rs.300,000/- as compensation u/s
544-A Cr.PC, which shall be paid to

the legal heirs of deceased Nabi
Ullah and recoverable as arrear of
land revenue or in default thereof to
suffer Six months SI further.

U/s 302-B PPC for the murder of
deceased Mst.Siraj sentenced to
death with direction to pay
Rs.300,000/- as compensation u/s
544-A Cr.PC, which shall be paid to
the legal heirs of deceased Mst. Siraj
and recoverable as arrear of land
revenue or in default thereof to
suffer Six months SI further,

U/s 324 PPC, to undergo
imprisonment for 5 years RI with a
fine of Rs.10,000/- or in default to
suffer two months SI.

U/s 337-F(iii) PPC to undergo six
months RI with fine of Rs.10,000/- as
Tazeer. Benefit of Section 382-B
Cr.PC was extended in favour of the
appellant.”

2. The appellant has filed this appeal against his
conviction and sentence whereas the learned trial Ccourt
has sent a Reference under section 374 Cr.P.C bearing
No.10/14, for confirmation or otherwise of the death
sentence passed against the appellant Abdul Samad alias
Samad. We propose to decide both the matters together
through this single judgment.

3. According to prosecution case, complainant
Saif Ullah was present near his house when in the
meanwhile, appellant/convict alongwith absconding co-
accused Shakeel duly armed with firearms came there and

started altercation with him and after hearing the same,

**BS8TBD-

~s
when the parents of complainant came out of their house,
both the accused started firing at the complainant party as a
result of which parents of complainant got hit and died on
the spot whereas complainant sustained injuries on his
body. The occurrence was also witnessed by PW.Mst.Saba
Gul(sister of complainant) who had come out on
altercation. Motive behind the occurrence was stated to be
previous ill-will. Consequently a case vide FIR mentioned
above was registered against the accused.
4, After completion of investigation, initially
challan u/s 512 Cr.PC was submitted against both the
accused, however, after arrest of appellant/convict,
supplementary challan was submitted against him in the
trial Court where after framing of formal charge against the
appellant, the prosecution in order to prove its case,
examined the following 10 witnesses:-

PW.1 Bacha Khan SI registered the case vide FIR
Ex.PA on receipt of murasila; Bakht Shed Khan(Pw.2)
scribed the murasila Ex.PA/1, prepared injury sheet of

complainant, injury sheets of both the deceased as well as

29 DEC2016
their inquest reports; PW.3 Inam Ullah is identifier of the
dead bodies of both the deceased before the police as well
as before the doctors at the time of examination. This
witness was re-examined as marginal witness to recovery
memos Ex.PW.3/1, Ex.PW.3/2, Ex.PW.3/3, vide which
blood stained earth from the places of deceased, seven
empties of 7.62 bore recovered from the spot, last worn
clothes of both the deceased were taken into possession by
the 1.0; PW.4 Muhammad Zuber No.1348 executed
warrants u/s 204 Cr.PC as well as proclamation notices u/s
87 Cr.PC, issued against the appellant and absconding co-
accused and submitted his reports; Dr.Syed Akbar Shah
(PW.5) & Lady Dr.Saima Saeed (PW.6) conducted
autopsy on the dead bodies of deceased Nabi Ullah and
Mst.Siraja respectively and injured/complainant was also
examined by PW.5; the ocular account is furnished by
complainant Saif Ullah (PW.7) & Mst.Saba Gul (PW.8)
who narrated the whole story regarding the occurrence.
PW.9 Ali Zar Shah Khan SI, has conducted investigation

in the instant case and after completion of investigation

handed over the case file to the SHO for submission of
challan against the accused; Amjad Khan SHO(PW.10)
has submitted challan ws 512 Cr.PC against both the
accused and after arrest of appellant, he prepared his card of
arrest.

5. On conclusion of prosecution evidence,
statement of appellant u/s 342 Cr.PC was recorded wherein
he denied the allegation levelled against him and professed
his innocence and did not opt to be examined on oath or to
produce defence evidence. After hearing arguments of
learned counsel for the parties, the learned trial Court
convicted and sentenced the appellant vide impugned

judgment, hence the instant Criminal Appeal filed by the

appellant/convict.
6. Arguments heard and record perused.
7. Perusal of the record reveals that the

appellant/convict has directly been charged by the
complainant (PW.7) in his report in the shape of murasila
Ex.PA/I, which is duly supported by the eye witness

Mst.Saba Gul(PW.8), who was also present on the spot at

Se

ATTESTED:

\
INER

(Aawar High Court

29 DEC 2016

pee
relevant time. PW.7 during his examination before the
learned trial Court has reiterated the same facts and leveled
the same allegations against the appellant in a mode and
manner as he had mentioned in his report Ex.PA/1 before
the police on the basis whereof FIR Ex.PA was chalked out.
The other eye witness Mst.Saba Gul (P.W.8) had also
supported the stance taken by the complainant in the FIR as
well as in his statement recorded before the learned trial
Court as P.W.7. Both the PWs being eye-witnesses of the
occurrence have made consistent statements regarding
commission of offence by the appellant in the present case
alongwith absconding co-accused. It has been established
on record that on the day of occurrence, Saif Ullah
complainant (P.W.7) was present near his house when in
the meanwhile, appellant/convict alongwith absconding co-
accused came there, started altercation with him and after
coming out of parents of complainant from their house, the
accused started firing at the complainant party due to which
parents of complainant got hit and died on the spot while

PW.7 also sustained injuries in the result of said firing.

Both the parties being co-villagers and relatives inter se
were known to each other and after altercation of accused
with the complainant, the question of their misidentification
is ruled out though as per version of complainant the
accused had lit the torch towards the house of complainant
who went towards them. The occurrence had not taken
place suddenly as firstly altercation took place and on
hearing the same, both the deceased and PW.8 came out of
their houses so presence of both the witnesses at the spot at
the time of occurrence was quite natural and under the
given circumstances, the testimony of eye-witnesses cannot
be discarded merely on the ground that there was no light at
the time of occurrence. Admittedly, this is not a case of hit
and run rather the occurrence lasted for some time, which
gave sufficient time to P.W.7 and other eye-witness to
identify the appellant and the role played by them at the
spot and both the eye-witnesses have given plausible
explanation for their presence at the spot. They have made
consistent statements regarding presence of the appellant

alongwith absconding co-accused and the manner in which

@
they had brutally murdered two innocent persons and
injured the complainant. In spite of the fact that they had
been subjected to lengthy cross-examination, but the
defence had failed to shatter their credibility qua the
involvement of appellant in this case. Although some minor
contradictions in the statements of the eye-witnesses during
the cross-examination were found but those contradictions
do not cause any damage in the prosecution case as the eye-
witnesses have made consistent statements regarding
commission of offence by the appellant and role played by
them in this case, hence, we do not find any reason to
discard the testimony of the eye-witnesses. They had
corroborated each other on all material aspects of the case
and their evidence is not only straightforward, but the same
also inspired our confidence. Even otherwise, law does not
permit us to choose few sentences from the evidence and
base our decision in favour of defence while reading only
those sentences in isolation to the remaining evidence

available on the record. In this respect reliance is placed in

a case title, *Zaka Ullah & others Vs The State” (2015

x NER .
Peshawar:High Coutt

29 DEC IG
9

YLR_ 1977), the principle enunciated in the cited judgment
is reproduced as under:-

“Even otherwise, law does not
permit us to choose few sentence
from the evidence and base our
decision in favour of defence while
reading those sentences in isolation
to the remaining evidence available
on record.”

8. The medical evidence of the prosecution
furnished by Dr. Syed Akbar Shah (P.W.5) and Lady
Dr.Saima Saeed (P.W.6) had fully supported the ocular
account furnished by the prosecution, thus, after taking into
consideration the whole prosecution evidence, we have
come to the conclusion that ocular account of the
prosecution is in line with the medical evidence,

9. So far as vehement arguments of learned
counsel for the appellant that the deceased had enmities
with other people, is not sufficient to discard the testimony
of such natural witnesses on the basis of enmity, in this
respect wisdom is derived from the judgment of august
Supreme Court of Pakistan in case titled as “Taj Vs The

State “(2012 SCMR 43), the principle enunciated in the

cited judgment is reproduced below:-

62)
“The injured witnesses had also
received numerous injuries during
the occurrence and the doctor
Muhammad Ashraf (PW.16)
supported the factum of injuries.
Thus, their presence at the spot was
established. The eye witnesses were
subjected to cross examination but
nothing had come to doubt their
credibility. Thus, their presence
was natural as they sustained
injuries alongwith deceased at the
time of incident.”

10. The other contention regarding mentioning of
time in respect of receiving information regarding
occurrence as 8.00 PM by the PW.3 is also of no help to the
defence as admittedly the said witness was not the eye
witness of the occurrence nor any contradiction is pointed
out by defence in statements of eye witnesses regarding
time of occurrence, which is in line with the report, so such
a minor discrepancy may be the result of slip of tongue,
which cannot be made a ground for shattering the testimony
of PW.7 & PW.8, when otherwise, the case is duly
supported by other evidence. The recoveries of blood
stained earth alongwith 7 empties of 7.62 bore from the
spot coupled with medical evidence, FSL report, site plan

suggests that the deceased were done to death whereas

29 DEC 2016
PW.7sustained injuries during the said iricidence as alleged
by him. Besides, appellant has remained absconder for
sufficient long time and proceedings u/s 204 & 87 Cr.PC
were initiated against him which abscondance can be taken
as a corroborative piece of evidence in presence of ocular
account and other evidence available on file.

11, Now adverting to the evidence of motive,
which as per FIR (Ex.PA) was previous ill-will and in
support of the same, FIR No.445 registered on the report of
deceased Nabi Ullah against absconding co-accused
(brother of appellant) is available on file which support the
stance of PW.7 regarding motive about the occurrence.

12. After having considered the facts and
circumstances of the case from all angles, we have come to
a definite view that the prosecution has successfully proved
its case by producing confidence inspiring and reliable
evidence against the appellant, who alongwith co-accused
had done to death two innocent persons and caused injuries
to the complainant (P.W.7) as such the judgment recorded

by the learned trial Court to the extent of conviction of the

SO;
12

appellants does not call for any interference by this Court, |
hence while maintaining the conviction of the appellant, the
instant Criminal Appeal is dismissed.
Murder Reference (MLR. No.10 of 2014) is
answered in the affirmative and death sentence of Abdul

. x,
Samad alias Samgd is eat — cE << GEE UF
Goretint
Announced: (7 — Pill LOCCET Vi Cb Cece +s

18.11.2015. Ht
JUDGE
ran
office a by
NY JUDGE

t, Peahavat
ON eae et
andar Order 19

“A.Qayum”

