JUDGMENT SHEET —
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT.

D.L.KHAN BENCH
(Judicial Department)

3

Cr.MBA.No.337-D/2019

Muhammad Shareef
Versus

The State and another

JUDGMENT
For petitioner: Mr. Nazar Muhammad  Niazi
Advocate.
For State: Mr. Adnan Ali, Asstt: A.G.

For complainant: | Mr. Nadim Abbas Baloch Advocate.

Date ofhearing: 22.11.2019.

kek

S.M. ATTIQUE SHAH, J.- Through the instant

petition under Section 497 Cr.PC, the accused/
petitioner Muhammad Shareef has sought post
arrest bail in case FIR No.399 dated 22.8.2019
under Sections 496-A/365/376/342 PPC registered
at Police Station Paharpur, District D.I-Khan.
Earlier the relief of bail was refused to him by the
Court of learned Additional Sessions Judge,
Paharpur, District D.I-Khan vide order dated
26.9.2019, hence, this petition.

2. According to the FIR on 20.8.2019 at
1020 hours, complainant Mulazim Hussain

reported to the local police that on 19.8.2019 at
-2-

‘Pashin Wela’ he was away in connection with
labour while his wife and son had gone to Rangpur
Adda for purchasing victuals and after some time
when came to the house, they found his daughter
Mst. Rehana Bibi missing. They started search of
her and are satisfied that she was enticed away by
accused Muhammad Shareef for the purpose of
committing Zina with her as he had developed
relations with her on mobile phone and demanded
her hand but the same was refused.

3. Arguments heard and record perused.

4. Perusal of record reveals that the
occurrence took place on 19.8.2019 at ‘Pashin
Wela’ whereas the matter was reported to the local
police with a sufficient delay on 20.8.2019 at 1020
hours for which no plausible explanation has so far
been furnished by the complainant.

5. On 23.8.2019 the alleged abductee
Mst. Rehana Bibi recorded her statement under
Section 164 Cr.PC before learned Judicial
Magistrate-II/MOD, D.I-Khan wherein she alleged
that the petitioner enticed and took her away
towards jungle where in an abundant room
committed Zina-bil-Jabr with her for two nights
and on 3™ night when he went to attend the call of

nature she skipped from there and reached to the

-3-

house in a QINGQI. Mst. Rehana Bibi was
medically examined by the lady doctor on
23.8.2019. Perusal of her medico-legal report
reveals that lady doctor did not observe any marks
of violence on her body or on her private parts
despite the fact that allegedly she was subjected to
rape in an abundant jungle/room. It has further
been noticed that no opinion regarding the
commission of rape with the victim was given by
the lady doctor after her medical examination,
therefore, the prosecution story is, prima facie, not
in line with the medical evidence.

6. Though the offence is heinous in
nature and against the society and also falls within
the prohibitory clause of Section 497 Cr.PC but
there is no legal or moral compulsion to keep
people in jail merely on the allegation that they
have committed offences punishable with death or
transportation, unless reasonable grounds appear to
exist to disclose their complicity. The ultimate
conviction and incarceration of a guilty person can
repair the wrong caused by a mistaken relief of bail
granted to him, but no satisfactory reparation can
be offered to an innocent man for his unjustified
incarceration at any stage of the case albeit his

acquittal in the long run.
th

-4-

7. In view of facts and circumstances of
the case, it is to be seen by the learned trial Court
that whether the alleged abductee was enticed
away by the petitioner or she went with him with
her own free will.

8. In view of the above, the petitioner
has made out a case for grant of bail, therefore, this
petition is allowed and the petitioner Muhammad
Shareef is admitted to bail on furnishing bail bonds
in the sum of Rs.2,00,000/- (Rupees two lac) with
two sureties, each in the like amount to the
satisfaction of Illaqa/Duty Judicial Magistrate.

9. The observations of this Court being
tentative in nature, would not affect the mind of the

trial Court in any manner whatsoever, during trial

of the case.
10. Above are the detailed reasons for my
short order of even date.
Announced.
Dt:22.11.2019. [etPPUf
Imran/* JUDGE

(S.B)
Hon’ble Mr. Justice S.M. Attique Shah
