JUDGMENT SHEET

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
PESHAWAR
(Judicial Department)

Crl. Appeal No.111-P/2015
Date of hearing:

Appellant (s) :

Respondent (s) :

JUDGMENT

ASSADULLAH KHAN CHAMMKANTI, _J.- This

appeal calls in question the legality and propriety of
judgment dated 14.01.2015, rendered by learned
Additional Sessions Judge-IV, Kohat, whereby he
acquitted respondents-accused 1. Rehmat Gul 2. Sahib Gul
and 3. Gul Ahmad, in case FIR No.596 dated 02.11.2011,
registered under sections 324/457/34 PPC, Police Station
Jungle Khel, District Kohat.

2. Brief account of the prosecution case is that
on 02.11.2011 at 10.25 hours, complainant Haji Bashir
Khan (PW.6), in injured condition reported to local police
in KDA hospital Kohat, that on the fateful night hours, he
alongwith other inmates was present in his house, when in
the meantime at 2145, accused-respondents duly armed,

came there, climbed over the wall of his house and opened

firing at them, as a result, he got hit and injured. A
monetary dispute has been alleged as motive behind the
incident. His report was reduced in to writing by Hamsher
Ali ASI (PW.4), in the shape of murasila, on the basis of
which FIR, mentioned above was registered.

3. On arrest of the accused/respondents and
completion of investigation challan was submitted against
them before the learned Trial Court, where they were
formally charge sheeted, to which they pleaded not guilty
and claimed trial. To bring home their guilt, prosecution
examined as many as thirteen witnesses. After closure of
the prosecution evidence, statements of the accused were
recorded under section 342 Cr.P.C., wherein they denied
the prosecution allegations and professed their innocence.
They, however, declined to be examined on oath under
section 340 (2) Cr.P.C. or to produce evidence in defence.
On conclusion of trial, the learned Trial Court, after
hearing both the sides, acquitted them, hence, this appeal.
4. Learned counsel for the appellant argued that
the impugned judgment of the learned Trial Court is
against the law facts and evidence available on record; that
prosecution has proved the guilt of the accused through
overwhelming ocular evidence corroborated by recovery of

blood and crime empties of various bores coupled with

medical evidence; that defence miserably failed to create
any dent in the prosecution evidence, therefore, the
impugned judgment is liable to be reversed.

5. Conversely, learned counsel for respondents-
accused contended that prosecution evidence is suffering
from material contradictions and discrepancies creating
serious doubts qua the guilt of the accused, benefit of
which has rightly been extended to the respondents-
accused by the learned Trial Court. He while supporting
the impugned judgment sought dismissal of the appeal.

6. I have heard the arguments of learned
counsel for the parties and perused the record with their
able assistance.

7. The incident is nocturnal, taken place at 2145
hours on 02.11.2011. No source of light has been disclosed
by complainant in his report nor has any such source been
noticed or taken into possession by the Investigating
Officer during spot inspection, in absence of which,
identification of the assailants from a distance of 16 to 19
paces in the dark, by the injured-complainant who was
under attack of firing of three assailants, does not appeal to
my mind. This sole and material doubt qua identification of
the accused would be sufficient to crumble the entire

edifice of the prosecution case. Besides, Haji Bashir Khan

complainant (PW.6), in his court statement introduced
quite a new story by deposing that at the time of incident
he was present in his Hujra when accused Sahib Gul, duly
armed with Kalashnikov, Rehmat Gul, armed with repeater
and Gul Ahmaed armed with pistol, climbed over the wall,
went on the rooftop and opened firing at him. In his report
he has disclosed the place of occurrence to be his house
and not Hujra and has also charged the accused for firing
on other inmates of his house. In his report he has not
disclosed about the kind of weapons in possession of each
accused, but after recovery of crime empties of 7.62 bore,
12 bore and 30 bore, he came forward with a new version
by attributing specific kind of weapon to each accused,
which would not advance his case, rather would put him in
the category of unreliable witness. This subsequent and
after thought version of the complainant, amounts to
dishonest improvement just to bring in line his case with
the recovery of crime empties.

8. Moreso, the matter has been reported after
preliminary investigation. Hasher Ali (PW.4) deposed that
after drafting murasila and preparing injury sheet, he
referred injured for medical examination. The time of
report as mentioned in the murasila is 10.45 p.m, but

according to Dr. Abdul Sami the injured was brought by

police and he examined him at 10.10 p.m. i.e. 20 minutes
prior to the time of report. This aspect creates further doubt
in the prosecution case.

9. So far as testimony of PW Rasheed Khan (the
son of injured-complainant) is concerned, his name, as an
eyewitness, does not figure anywhere in the FIR, and has
been introduced as such, later on. It has been held by the
august Apex Court in case titled, “Rashid Ahmed Vs
Muhammad Nawaz and others” (2006 SCMR 1152),
that testimony of the prosecution witness not mentioned in
the FIR, but introduced subsequently, had no evidentiary
value. Taking guidance from the judgment (supra), I
straight-away exclude the testimony of this witness from
consideration.

10. No doubt, in hurt cases, statement of injured
witness, supported by medical evidence, is sufficient for
recording conviction, provided it rings true and is
confidence inspiring, in view of its intrinsic worth. Mere
stamp of injuries on the person of a witness would not be a
proof of the fact that whatever he deposes would be the
truthful account of the events. His veracity is to be tested
from the circumstances of the case and his own statement
whether it fits in the circumstances of the case or

otherwise. It is well settled principle of law that for

recording conviction strong evidence of unimpeachable
character is required. It is golden principle of criminal
justice that finding of guilt against accused must not be
based on probabilities to be inferred from evidence but
must rest surely and firmly on tangible and concrete
evidence, otherwise, the golden rule of benefit of doubt
would be reduced to naught. The Courts by means of
proper appraisal of evidence must be vigilant to dig out
truth of the matter to ensure that no injustice is caused to
either party. It is cardinal principle of administration of
criminal justice that prosecution is bound to prove its case
beyond any shadow of doubt. If any reasonable doubt
arises in the prosecution case, benefit of the same must be
extended to the accused not as a matter of grace or
concession, but as a matter of right. Likewise, it is also
well embedded principle of criminal justice that there is no
need of so many doubts in the prosecution case, rather any
reasonable doubt arising out of the prosecution evidence,
pricking the judicial mind would be sufficient for acquittal
of the accused.

11. In the instant case, as discussed above, there are
so many circumstances which create serious doubts in the
prosecution case, benefit of which has rightly been

extended to the respondents-accused by the learned Trial

Court. Besides, this is appeal against acquittal and
standards of assessing evidence in appeal against acquittal
are quite different from those laid down for appeal against
conviction. Marked difference exists between appraisal of
evidence in appeal against conviction and in appeal against
acquittal. Appraisal of evidence, in appeal against
conviction is done strictly and in appeal against acquittal
such rigid method of appraisal is not to be applied as there
is already finding of acquittal given by the trial Court after
proper analysis of evidence on record. Scope of appeal
against acquittal of accused is considerably narrow and
limited. Unless the judgment of acquittal is perverse,
completely illegal and on perusal of evidence, no other
decision could be given except that accused is guilty or
there has been complete misreading of evidence leading to
miscarriage of justice. High Court is always slow in
exercise of jurisdiction under section 417 Cr.P.C. unless it
finds that gross injustice had been done in administration
of criminal justice. It is settled law that the appellate Court
while dealing with acquittal order had to exercise
jurisdiction cautiously because the acquitted accused
enjoys double presumption of innocence, the one available
to him before conclusion of the trial and the second after

the verdict of acquittal in his favour. While Court sitting in

appeal against acquittal must be slow in reversing the
judgment of acquittal, unless it is found to be arbitrary
fanciful and capricious on the face of it or is the result of
bare misreading or non-reading of any material evidence.
In the instant case, no such infirmity has been found in the
impugned judgment. The learned trial Court has rightly
acquitted the respondents/accused by extending them
benefit of doubt, after proper appraisal of evidence to
which no exception can be taken.

12. Accordingly, this appeal being without any
substance stands dismissed.

Announced
26.10.2015

JUDGE

*M Siraj Afridi PS. D
*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

10
*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

11
12

7. For what has been discussed above, Suo motu
notice given to accused Shakir stands withdrawn. He is
admitted to bail on already existing bail bonds, on merits.
Since this court has already directed expeditious
conclusion of trial while dealing with the bail petition of
co-accused Farman, therefore, office is directed to send the
record to the quarter concerned within two days, positively.
announced:

19.10.2015

JUDGE

*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

13
*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

14
