JUDGMENT SHEET
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,

BANNU BENCH.
(Judicial Department)

Cr. Misc: B.A No. 114-B of 2022.

Haji Sher Alam and another
Vs

The State & another,
JUDGMENT

Date of hearing: 28.03.2022.

For petitioners: M/s Muhammad Rashid Khan Dirma
Khel and Muhammad Ashraf Khan
Marwat Advocates.

For complainant: Mr. Anwar-ul-Haq Advocate.

For State: Sardar Muhammad Asif, Asstt: AG.
FORO ACK

SAHIBZADA ASADULLAH, J.- Haji Sher Alam Khan
and Haji Sharif Ullah Khan, the petitioners herein, after
having been involved and arrested in the case FIR No.
484, dated 11.11.2015, under sections 302/34 PPC of
Police Station, Ghazni Khel, District Lakki Marwat, had
applied for their post arrest bail before the lower court,
which was dismissed by learned Additional Sessions
Judge-III, Lakki Marwat, vide order dated 09.3.2022 and,

now, they have filed the instant application through their
counsel for the same relief before this Court.

2. Brief facts of the case are that on 11.11.2015
at 22:15 hours complainant Aleem Khan in presence of
dead body of his relative Muhammad Faizan reported the
matter at RHC Tittar Khel to the effect that on the
eventful day he and his relative Muhammad Faizan were
present in Baithak owned by Muhammad Faizan, situated
at Tittar Khel, when Muhammad Faizan contacted
accused Haji Sharif Ullah alias Shafi through cell phone
and discussed money matter with him. Sharifullah invited
him to his house for receiving the money. Both the
complainant and deceased started in a motorcar towards
Sharifullah. Complainant de-boarded from the motorcar
while deceased went near the Baithak of Sharifullah.
Headlights of the motorcar were on. At about 21:30 hours
accused Sher Alam and an unknown accused duly armed
with Kalashnikovs came out from the Baithak and started
firing at the deceased Muhammad Faizan, with which he
got hit and died on the spot. Initially the complainant
charged accused Sher Alam and an unknown accused,
however, on the following day the complainant introduced

the unknown accused as Sharifullah. Later on the
complainant recorded his statement under section 164
Cr.P.C before the learned Illaqa Magistrate, where he
resiled from the contents of report, he made and stated
that he had not seen the occurrence, but charged the

accused on the instruction of father of deceased.

3. I have heard arguments of learned counsel
for petitioners, learned Assistant Advocate General for the
State and learned counsel for the complainant and with

their able assistant the record was gone through.

4. It was on 11.11.2015 when the deceased was
done to death and the matter was reported by the
complainant Aleem Khan, where the petitioners were
charged for the death of the deceased. The investigating
officer visited the spot and on pointation of the
complainant prepared the site plan. During spot inspection
from the place assigned to accused Sharif Ullah, 19
empties of 7.62 bore were taken into possession and from
that of the accused Sher Alam, 35 empties were secured.
It is pertinent to mention that from inside Baithak of the
accused/ petitioners, the investigating officer recovered 17

empties and a spent bullet.

5. It is interesting to note that the complainant
Aleem Khan submitted an application for recording his
statement under section 164 Cr.P.C,. before the court of
Judicial Magistrate, which was allowed and his statement
was recorded on 14.12.2015, where he did not stick to his
report rather he explained the situation in a different
manner. It was on the following day that the investigating
officer recorded statements of one Sifat Ullah and Hidayat
Ullah who introduced themselves as the eye witnesses of

the incident.

6. The investigating officer visited the spot and
prepared site plan on pointation of the complainant, but no
place was assigned to the later introduced witnesses. It
was the high ups in the hierarchy that the investigating
officer was directed to add their points in the site plan,

wherefrom they saw the incident.

7. As in the instant case discrepancies are
apparent on surface of record so this court is under
obligation to take into consideration the same coupled
with the statement recorded by the complainant before the
court of Judicial Magistrate and the later appearance of
the witnesses whose statements were recorded on the

following day of the incident. There is no denial to the
fact that the complainant did not mention the presence of
the eye witnesses at the time of incident and even he in his
report mentioned that soon after the incident he ran away
from the spot and the dead body was shifted to the
hospital by the relatives. He further disclosed in his report
that on reaching to the hospital he reported the matter.
The source of identification was mentioned by the
complainant the headlights of the motorcar, but the
distance wherefrom the complainant allegedly witnessed
the incident has been given as 1430 feet, wherefrom such
a long distance the identification of the accused is still a
bagging question. His coming down from the car at such a
considerable distance makes his presence doubtful at the

place of incident.

8. This court cannot lose sight of the fact that
the complainant did not stick to his stance and as such he
was permitted to record the statement under section 164
Cr.P.C which is still holding the field, though proceedings
under section 182 P.P.C are still under progress against
the complainant. The record reveals that the empties were
not recovered only from the street, where the incident

occurred, rather 17 empties of 7.62 bore were collected
from inside the Baithak with a spent bullet. The recoveries
from the Baithak has provided a twist to the prosecution
case and even a 9 mm bore pistol with a stuck empty was

recovered from the body of the deceased.

9. True that at bail stage deeper appreciation is
not warranted and only tentative assessment is to be made,
but equally true that bail applications cannot be heard and
decided in a vacuum, rather the courts seized of the record
must go through the record of the case, though tentatively.
The benefit of doubt if arises has always been considered
by the apex court in favour of the accused charged even at

bail stage. Reliance is placed on case titled, “Syed

Amanullah Shah Vs. The State and another” (PLD
1996 SC 241), wherein it is held that:

“So whenever reasonable doubt
arises with regard to the
participation of an accused person
in the crime or about the truth/
probability of the prosecution case
and the evidence proposed to be
produced in support of the charge,
the accused should not be
deprived of benefit of bail. In such
a situation, it would be better to

keep an accused person on bail

then in the jail, during the trial.
Freedom of an individual is a
precious right. Personal liberty
granted by a Court of competent
jurisdiction should not be
snatched away from accused
unless it becomes necessary to
deprive him of his liberty under

the law.”

In another case titled “Muhammad Faisal Vs. the State
and another” (2020 SCMR 971) it has been held that:

“The accumulative effect of all
these facts and circumstances
create doubt regarding
truthfulness of _ prosecution
version. It is established principle
of law that benefit of doubt can be

extended at bail.”

10. It was stressed time and again that one of the
petitioners namely Haji Sharifullah misused the interim
relief granted in his favour, time and again and that he
jumped up the bail granting order. It was further
submitted that this misconduct on the part of the petitioner
cannot be tolerated as it undermines the authority of the
court and adds to its disrespect. I am too concerned with

what the learned counsel submitted but at present keeping
in view the attending circumstances of the present case, I
deem it hard to bifurcate the case of the petitioner
Sharifullah on that score alone. However, keeping in view
the conduct displayed I see the only alternative to burden
him with the burden of heavy bail bonds and in case of
repetition of his previous conduct either this or the learned
trial court would be at liberty to recall the bail granting
order. As the petitioners have been succeeded in making
out a case for bail, the instant bail application is allowed
and the petitioners admitted to bail subject to furnishing
bail bonds to the tune of Rs.9,00,000/- (rupees nine lac)
each with two sureties each in the like amount to the
satisfaction of the Illaqa Judicial Magistrate/ MOD. They
shall be released forthwith if not required to be detained in

connection of any other criminal case.

Needless to mention that the observations rendered
above are tentative in nature which shall not influence the

mind of the learned trial Judge.

eo

Announced. G Sk. Zw

28.03.2022

Thsan.*/-

JUDGE

(S.B)
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Sahibzada Asadullah.

