PESHAWAR HIGH COURT ABBOTTABAD
BENCH

JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT
JUDGMENT SHEET

Cr. M (Bail) No. 846-A/2020.

Date of hearing 16.10.2020.

Petitioner/s (Hamid Ali) by Mr. Muhammad
Masood ur Rehman Tanoli, Advocate.

Respondent/s (The State) by Raja
Muhammad Zubair, AAG and complainant
by Mr. Atif Ali Jadoon, Advocate.
MOHAMMAD IBRAHIM KHAN, J. After
being entangled in case FIR No. 1050 dated:
05.08.2020 under sections 302/34 PPC
registered at Police Station, Cantt, District,
Abbottabad, accused/petitioner is looking for
his post arrest bail.

2. Prior to that the accused/petitioner has
also applied for his post arrest bail to the
learned lower forum, where his application
stood rejected, hence, the instant petition.

3. Tersely, the facts of the case as
mentioned in the first information report are
that on 05.08.2020 at 12:25 hours, the
complainant Rashid Hussain alongwith
injured Sadagat son of Adalat reported the

matter at Emergency room of DHQ, Haripur
by stating that Sadaqat is his employee. That
he alongwith said Sadagqat was present in his
plot and Sadaqat was levelling the said plot
through labors, in the meanwhile at about
12:00 hours, Muzafar son of Kala, Faizi,
Shibli sons of Muzafar, Sadam and Hamid
came there duly armed and started abusing.
Muzafar made /alkara to the others to kill
all, upon this, Hamid (present petitioner)
fired at Sadaqat, who got hit and fell down
on the spot, all the accused after the
occurrence decamped from the spot by
making firing. Hence, the instant FIR.

4. Learned counsel for the parties,
learned AAG heard and record available
gone through with their valuable assistance.
5. Record in the light of arguments
would reveal that in the present case, the
accused/petitioner is the person, who is
directly and by named charged with a
specific role with whom firing one Sadagat
got hit/injured and succumbed to injury
later-on. There is no delay in reporting the
incident to the local police. The witnesses of

the alleged occurrence are also duly
shown/cited in the FIR. There is no denial of
presence of the accused/petitioner at the
place of occurrence at the time of alleged
occurrence. Apart from the above, crime
empties have also been recovered from the
place of occurrence.

6. In a case reported as 2015 SCMR
655, titled: Muhammad Fiaz alias Bhoora
Vs. The State, the Hon’ble Court declined the
bail and held as under:-

In the instant case, we are of the
considered view that the FIR
against the petitioner was
promptly lodged in which specific
role of firing at the deceased was
attributed to the petitioner. The
prosecution witnesses examined
under section 161 Cr. P.C fully
implicate the petitioner. No case
of further inquiry has been made
out.

7. At the moment, there seems no ill will
or false implication on the part of
complainant as motive for offence has also
been explained in the Murasila/FIR.

8. At the bail stage only tentative
assessment of record is required and deeper
appreciation is not permissible. At the

moment, record available on file prima facie
directly connects the accused-petitioner with
the commission of offence which squarely
falls within the prohibitory limb of Section

497 Cr. P.C.

9. Needless to mention here that the
observations made above are purely tentative
in nature and should in no way prejudice the
case of either party during trial. In this
regard, reliance is placed on case law

reported in (1996 SCMR 1845) wherein it
has been held that:-

“However we would like to point
out in no certain terms that the
observations made by the High
Court in the orders granting bail
and by us in this order are confined
to tentative assessment made for the
purpose of disposal of bail
applications and not intended to
influence the mind of the trial
Court, which is free to appraise the
evidence strictly according to its
merits and the law of the time of
disposal of the case, which of
course, needless to say, is the

function of the trial Court”.

10. In view of the above stated facts and
circumstances of the case, the
accused/petitioner has not made out his case

arguable for the purpose of bail, therefore,
he is not entitled to be released on bail,
hence, the instant bail petition, being bereft
of merit, is dismissed accordingly.

Announced.
16.10.2020.

Tahir P/Secretary.

JUDGE
