Judgment Sheet

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
PESHAWAR

(Judicial Department)
Criminal Appeal No. 931-P/201f-
Suleman Vs The State.

JUDGMENT
Date of hearing. 18.02.2022.
Appellant(s) by: Ms. Farhana Naz Marwat Advocate.

Respondent(s) by: Ms. Abida Safdar AAG.
rr

MUHAMMAD FAHEEM WALL, J:-Through instant
criminal appeal filed under Section under Section 24 KP CNSA
2019, appellant Suleman has challenged the impugned
judgment dated 06. 10.2021, rendered by learned Additional
Sessions Judge-II/ JSC, Takht Bhai, Mardan; whereby
appellant involved in case FIR No.624 dated 22. 08.2020,
under Section 9-D KP CNSA 2019, Police Station Sher Garh,
District Mardan, was convicted under Section 9-D KP CNSA
2019 and sentenced to undergo 10 years R.I alongwith fine of
Rs.500,000/- or in default thereof to. suffer further six(06)
months SI; however, benefit of Section 382-B Cr.PC was

extended to the appellant/ convict.
2. According to prosecution case, during checking,
the Excise officials/personnel intercepted a Suzuki Motorcar
bearing registration No.LOY-9868, driven by appellant; while
co-accused Siyab was sitting on front seat of the said
motorcar. On search, barring the driver gate, from inner side
of rest of three gates, seven packets of Charas total weighing
7028 grams were recovered. From the personal search of
appellant and co-accused Siyab, two mobile sets, their CNIC,
one membership card of appellant and copy of registration
card was recovered. The registration documents of the
vehicle were also taken into custody by the Excise officials.
The contraband alongwith motorcar and other personal
belongings of accused etc were taken into custody by Excise
personnel, both the accused were arrested and a case vide
FIR mentioned above was registered against them.

3. After completion of investigation, complete
challan against accused was submitted before the learned
trial Court; where after framing of formal charge against the
accused, the prosecution in order to prove its case against the
accused, examined as many as seven(07) PWs. On closure of
prosecution evidence, statements of accused under Section

342 Cr PC was recorded; wherein they denied the allegations
7

levelled against them; however, they did not opt to be
examined on oath under Section 340(2) Cr.PC nor wished to
produce defence evidence. At conclusion of trial, the learned
trial Court convicted and sentenced the appellant/accused;
while co-accused Siyab was acquitted from the charges
levelled against him vide impugned judgment; hence the
instant criminal appeal.

4. We have heard learned counsel for the appellant,
learned AAG for the State and gone through the available
record.

5. As per contents of murasila Ex.PA/1, the Excise
officials intercepted the vehicle in question, driven by
appellant; while co-accused Siyab was sitting on front seat of
the said vehicle; the search of which led to the recovery of
Charas total weighing 7028 grams. However, neither in the
Murasila nor in the FSL report, it has been mentioned that it
was Charas Pukhta or Charas Garda. Likewise, the contents of
murasila Ex.,PA/1 reveals that samples were separated from
the recovered contraband and sealed into parcels for sending
it to FSL but neither number nor name of monogram affixed
thereon has been mentioned in the murasila. Though in

recovery memo Ex.PW.1/3, the number of monogram has
been written as 3/3 monograms but instead of mentioning
the name of monogram, only a rubber stamp has been affixed
therein; which does not denote any monogram. Besides,
registration documents of the motorcar have allegedly been
recovered from the motorcar in question but it has not been
clarified that from which place of the motorcar, it was
recovered and; who was the owner of the vehicle as per the
ibid registration documents. Even no driving license has been
recovered from the direct possession of the appellant; so in
absence of any driving license, it cannot be stated with
certainty that who was on driving seat of the motorcar at the
relevant time, so mere disclosing the appellant as driver of
the vehicle is not sufficient qua corroboration of version of
prosecution particularly when no recovery has been effected
from the immediate possession of the appellant. Moreover, as
per site plan, both the accused have been shown at points
No.6 & 7 proceeding in motorcar from Mardan side;
disclosing the presence of accused sitting behind each other;
meaning thereby that one accused was sitting on front
portion of the car while the other was sitting on rear seat of

the vehicle; thereby, denying the version of prosecution qua
sitting of accused on driving seat as well as front seat of the
motorcar.

6. In the instant case complainant/seizing officer
Riaz Khan Inspector was examined as PW.1; while marginal
witness namely Naeem Khattak ASI was examined as PW.2;
but both these witnesses did not support each other on
material points. According to PW.1, he was Incharge of the
Check Post at relevant time; while PW.2, did not know that
who was the Incharge of the checking staff at that time. PW.1
asserts that he opened the gates of the motorcar through
screw driver brought by one Muhammad Ilyas constable from
the official vehicle; whereas PW.2 denied his version by
stating that at the time of checking the motorcar, the screw
driver was in the hand of PW.1. PW.1, stated that after
recovery of contraband, the gates of the motorcar were
refitted by a constable in presence of marginal witnesses;
while PW.2 asserts that it was not refitted in his presence. He
was also unable to disclose the exact time of their arrival to
the spot in his cross examination; rather stated that they
follow the order of PW.1 and when and where he orders, they
obey the same. According to PW.1, he weighed the

contraband separately but as per PW.2, it was first weighed
separately and thereafter, the entire packets of narcotics
were weighed. As per assertion of PW.1, the accused
alongwith contraband and other documents were taken by
Iftikhar Ajmal SI, Muhammad Ilyas and Attiqur Rehman
constables in the motorcar of accused (case property) to the
police Station; which deposition was belied by PW.2 by
stating that official vehicle was taken alongwith motorcar of
accused to the Police station. Likewise, PW.1 stated that they
affixed lights in the trees near the check post and also kept a
torch; in the light of which they alongwith 1.0 (PW.6)
conducted the proceedings on the spot but as per PW.2, it
was done in the light installed on the check post; however,
PW.6 denied the assertions of both these witnesses by stating
that in the lights of vehicles, the spot proceedings were
conducted.

7. The alleged contraband has been recovered on
22.08.2020; while it was sent to the FSL on 24.08.2020 after
delay of about two days; which fact is evident from the report
of FSL as well as statement of concerned Moharrir and; the
constable who took it to the FSL but the application of FSL
does not bear any date of its drafting; while the relevant

column qua date of its taking to the FSL, the name of the
official, who took it to the FSL and the receipt number on
which it has been sent by the Excise officials, are blank. Even
PW.2 Muhammad Qayum Khan Oll{Investigation Officer) was
unaware qua safe custody of the case property till sending to
the FSL; who stated that he did not know that where the case
property was kept till sending to the FSL. Moreover, none
from the three officials who took the murasila alongwith case
property and accused to the Police Station, has been
examined by the prosecution during trial in support of its
case in order to explain the handing over case property as
well as its safe custody till the transmission to the FSL; for the
reasons best known to them; which is clear violation of
provision of Article 129-G of Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984;

as the prosecution had withheld its best evidence. Reliance

be placed on case of “Muhammad Shah Khesro & another
hers” r. wherein this
Court has held as under:-

Article-129 (g)—Withholding of
evidence—Presumption—If a best
piece of evidence is available with
a party and the same is withheld
by him, then it is presumed that
the party has some evil motive
behind it in not producing that
evidence.”
8. Apart from above, the delay of two days in
sending the samples to the FSL has also not been plausibly
explained by the prosecution; therefore, the evidence qua
same transmission of alleged recovered narcotics to the
laboratory for chemical analysis is missing. Chain of custody
or safe custody and safe transmission of narcotic drug began
with seizure of the narcotic drug by the law enforcement
officer, followed by separation of the representative samples
of the seized narcotic drug, storage of the representative
samples and the narcotic drug with the law enforcement
agency and then dispatch of the representative samples of the
narcotic drugs to the office of the chemical examiner for
examination and testing. Any break or gap in the chain of
custody, i.e, in the safe custody or safe transmission of the
narcotic drug or its representative samples made the report
of the Chemical Examiner unsafe and unreliable for justifying
conviction of the accused. Wisdom is derived from the
judgments of august Supreme Court of Pakistan, reported in
cases of “Qaiser Khan Vs The State” (2021 SCMR 363) and
ny: 20 M
9. Keeping in view the above, the prosecution had

not been able to establish that after the alleged recovery the
substance so recovered was either kept in safe custody or
that the sample taken from the recovered substance had
safely been transmitted to the office of the Chemical
Examiner without the same being tampered with or replaced
while in transit; which creates doubt in the prosecution case,
the benefit whereof go in favour of the accused. Likewise,
numerous material contradictions between the statements of
prosecution witnesses; create doubt qua mode and manner of
recovery of contraband as well as presence of prosecution
witnesses on the spot. Had they been present on the spot at
the relevant time and recovered the contraband from the
vehicle of accused in the mode and manner advanced by
them; they would have supported each other on material
points instead of contradicting each other. As per settled
principles and guidelines provided by the Hon'ble august
apex Court, in case of doubt, its benefit must go to the
accused not as a matter of grace but of right. Such proposition
has come up for consideration in the case of “Muhammad

” (200 wherein it has been
held that:

"It is an axiomatic principle of
law that in case of doubt, the

benefit thereof must accrue in
favour of the accused as a
10

matter of right and not of
grace.”

It was observed by the apex Court in the case of “Tarig
Pervez v. The State” (1995 SCMR 1345) that:

“for giving the benefit of doubt,
it was not necessary that there
should be many circumstances
creating doubts. If there is
circumstance which created
reasonable doubt in a prudent
mind about the guilt of the
accused, then the accused would
be entitled to the benefit of
doubt not as a matter of grace
and concession but as a matter
of right. Merely because the
burden is on the accused to
prove his innocence it does not
absolve the prosecution from its
duty to prove its case against the
accused beyond any shadow of
doubt and this duty does not
change or vary in the case. A
finding of guilt against an
accused person cannot be based
merely on the high probabilities
that may be inferred from
evidence in a given case. Mere
conjectures and_ probabilities
cannot take the place of proof.”

10. For what has been discussed above, we are of the
firm view that the prosecution has miserably failed to prove
its case against appellant beyond reasonable doubt to sustain
conviction; as the evidence produced by prosecution during

trial is full of contradictions and loop holes; creating doubt
11

qua mode and manner of recovery of contraband as well as
presence of appellant on driving seat at relevant time; the
benefit of which must be given to the accused. It is settled
law that for giving/ extending benefit of doubt to an accused,
it is not necessary that there should be many circumstances
creating uncertainty. If a single circumstance created
reasonable doubt in a prudent mind about the apprehension
of guilt of an accused, then he/she shall be entitled to such
benefit not as a matter of grace and concession, but as a right;
while the instant case is full of doubts. Therefore, instant
appeal is allowed, the impugned judgment dated 06. 10.2021,
passed by learned trial Court qua conviction and sentence of
appellant is set aside and; the appellant is acquitted of the
charge levelled against him. He is in custody, be released
forthwith if not required in any other case.

The above are reasons of our short order of even

date.
Announced:
18.02.2022. CAUCEOE AT
DGE
Hit
an m.
JUDGE

“A.Qayum PS” (DB) Hon’ble Mr. Justice S M Attique Shah & Hon *ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Faheem Wali.
