JUDGMENT SHEET
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
BANNU BENCH
(Judicial Department)
Cr.Mise:BA No.590-B/2023
Syed Khan alias Malangi
Versus.
The State
JUDGMENT

Date of hearing: 17.11.2023

For petitioner: Mr. Younas Ali Shah Advocate.
For State: Mr. Umer Qayyum Khan, A.A.G.
OK

Dr. Khurshid Iqbal, J.-

1. The petitioner, Syed Khan alias Malangi, seeks
release on bail in case FIR No.974, dated 24.10.2023,
registered under section 11(b) of the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa
Control of Narcotic Substances Act, 2019, at Police Station

Cantt, District Bannu.

2. On 24.10.2023, a police patrol led by Rauf Khan,
PASI, received information that a notorious drug peddler,
known as Syed Khan alias Malangi, was awaiting clients
for the sale of ice on the metalled road of Amandi Amir
Jan, near River Kurram. Acting on the information, the
police patrol immediately rushed to the spot and spotted a
person matching the informant's description. On seeing the
police patrol, the person attempted to flee, but was
apprehended. His physical search revealed a polythene bag
containing 527 grams of ice in his side pocket. The ice was
seized through a recovery memo, dated 24.10.2023. The
person disclosed his identity as Syed Khan alias Malangi,
son of Mira Khan from Bazid Tughal Khel, District Bannu.

He was arrested. A murasila of the incident report was
Page - 2 - of 3

drafted and forwarded to the police station for case

registration. Hence, the FIR.
3. Arguments heard. Record perused.

4. The record reveals that 527 grams of ice was
recovered from the direct possession of the petitioner. It is
a huge quantity. A sample of one gram was extracted from
it and sent to the FSL for chemical analysis. The FSL
report was received in positive, confirming the nature of
the substance as ice. It is imperative to acknowledge that
the escalating menace of ice, both in its sale and usage, is a
pressing concern that intensifies day by day. Viewing this
issue from a broader perspective, the widespread
prevalence of ice as a narcotic substance poses a grave
threat to the society, carrying the potential to precipitate its
eventual collapse and imperil the future of the youth. If left
unchecked, the pervasive consequences of this menace can
undermine the stability, progress, and prosperity of the
nation as a whole. The Legislature, recognizing the
urgency of the situation, has proactively brought about
legislative strictness within the province through the
enactment of the 2019 CNS Act. The legislative
framework on the subject underscores the gravity of the
menace. It is, therefore, high time to combat this issue with
a robust judicial response in confluence with the legislative

efforts.

5. Though, the learned counsel has strongly advocated
for bail given that the sample parcel was dispatched to the
FSL beyond 72 hours. According to him, it is the violation
of Rule-4(2) of the Control of Narcotic Substances
(Government Analysts) Rules, 2001. To support his
contention, a precedent of this Court in Cr.Misc.BA
No.04-B/2022, dated 10.01.2022, was cited. However, it
has been superseded by the Supreme Court's judgment in

Gull Din v. The State through P.G. Punjab and another

Page - 3 - of 3

(2023 SCMR 306), establishing that Rule-4(2) being
directory in nature, its non-compliance would not be a
sufficient ground for bail. The latest Supreme Court
judgment, binding on this Court by virtue of Article 189 of
the Constitution, mandates adherence, and in adherence

thereto, the contention is repelled.

6. A tentative reading of the record prima facie
connects the petitioner to the offence alleged against him.
It entails punishment which is covered by the prohibition
contemplated in section 497 Cr.P.C. Given these facts and
circumstances, the petitioner does not merit bail.

Consequently, the application is refused.

Announced

Dt:17.11.2023
(Ghafoor Zaman)

(S.B) Hon’ble Mr. Justice Dr. Khurshid Iqbal

