JUDGMENT SHEET

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,

PESHAWAR
(Judicial Department)

Cr.A. No.461-P/2012

Date of hearing:

Appellant (s) :

Respondent (s) :

JUDGMENT

ASSADULLAH KHAN CHAMMKANTI, J.-

This appeal calls in question the legality and

propriety of judgment dated 17.09.2012,

rendered by learned Additional Sessions

Judge-IV, Swabi, whereby he convicted and

sentenced appellants (1) Fida Muhammad and

(2) Aman Ullah, as under:-

Under section 302 PPC:- To

undergo imprisonment for life each

and to pay a fine of Rs.1,00,000/-, as

compensation in terms of §$.544-A

Cr.P.C. to LRs of deceased Qayum

or in default hereof to undergo one

year S.J. further, each.

Under sections 324 PPC:- To

undergo five years R.I. each for

attempting at the life of injured

complainant Momin Khan and to

pay him Daman to the tune of

Rs.50,000/- each, within the

meaning of section 337-E(vi) PPC.

Under section 324 PPC:- To

undergo 02 years imprisonment each

for attempting at the life of PW

Adnan.

The sentences have been directed to

run concurrently. Benefit of Section

382-B Cr.P.C. has been extended to

them.

2. The prosecution case is that on

22.06.2011 at 1900 hours, Momin Khan injured

(PW.11), in company of injured Qayum and

*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

Shams ur Rehaman, reported to local Police

that on the fateful day he alongwith PW Adnan

and injured Qayum, was on the way to home

from Swabi Bazaar on a motorbike, being

driven by him, while the latter two were sitting

behind him; that at 1900 hours when they

reached the Clinic of Dr. Saeed, Fida

Muhammad and Aman Ullah (appellants-

convicts herein) alongwith absconding

co-accused Said Ghalib Shah, duly armed with

firearms, present there, opened fire at them,

with the intention to do them away, as a result,

he and Qayum got hit alongwith a passerby

riding on a bicycle, namely, Shams ur Rehman,

however, his son PW Adnan, luckily remained

unscathed. A previous blood feud has been

alleged as motive behind the incident.

3. Report of the complainant was reduced

into writing by Amir Hamza Khan SI (PW.1) in

the shape of murasila Exh.PA/1, verified by

*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

injured Qayum and Shams ur Rehman, on the

basis of which FIR No.842 dated 22.06.2011

under sections 302/324/34 PPC, was registered

in Police Station Swabi against the appellants

and absconding co-accused. He prepared injury

sheets of the injured Exh.PW.1/1 to

Exh.PW.1/3 and referred them for medical

examination. Injured Qayum, later on,

succumbed to injuries on the way to LRH,

Peshawar, therefore he was brought back to the

aforesaid hospital, so he prepared his inquest

report Exh.PW.1/5 and shifted his dead body to

the mortuary for autopsy and conveyed

information to Police Station concerned for

insertion of section 302 PPC.

4. Dr. Bawar Shah (PW.7) conducted

autopsy on the dead body of the deceased

Qayum on 22.06.2011 at about 8.45 p.m. and

found the following injuries:-

1. Entry wound 1/3 x 1/3 cm on the right

upper arm anterior side near the

shoulder joint.
2. Exit wound 4 x 3 cm on the right axial.
3. Entry wound 1/3 x 1/3 cm on the right

side of back the chest.

Opinion:- According to his opinion, the

deceased died due to severe bleeding from

vessels particularly from his right axilary

artery.

Probable time between injury and death has

been given as 01 to 2 hours while between

death and postmortem as 30 minutes to 02

hours.

Dr. Mukamil Khan (PW.10) examined

injured Shams ur Rehman on the same day at

07.20 pm and found the following injuries on

his person:-

1. Lacerated wound (looking perforating

at one point) 6 x 2 cm muscles deep in

most of the area on he right side of

back of he chest. No charring marks.

2. Lacerated wound 2x0.5 cm on the back

of left chest. The wound is muscles

deep. Here are no charring spots.

3. Lacerated wound 1x 1.5 cm in size,

skin deep in the back of chest in he mid

line.

Kind of weapon: firearm

Duration of injuries: 30 to 60 minutes.

He also examined injured Momin Khan

and found the following injuries on his body:-

1. Entry wound 0.5 cm on lateral side of

left leg. No charring marks.

2. Exit wound 4 cm x 2 cm encircle on

the medial side of left leg.

Leg having deformity i.e. fracture of

the bone. The patient was referred to LRH for

further treatment.

Nature of injuries: firearm

Duration: within 30 to 60 minutes.

*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

5. Aurangzeb Khan ASI (PW.13)

conducted investigation in the case. He

proceeded to the spot and prepared site plan.

During spot inspection he secured blood from

motorcycle of complainant vide memo Exh.PC.

The motorcycle having damaged mudguard,

was also taken into possession vide recovery

memo Exh.PC/4. He secured blood from the

place of deceased Qayum through cotton vide

memo Exh.PC/1, took into possession 02

empties of 7.62 bore Exh.P.4 from the place of

accused Aman Ullah vide memo Exh.PC/2,

4 empties of same bore Exh.P.5 from the place

of absconding co-accused vide memo

Exh.PC/3. Vide memo Exh.PC/5 he took into

possession bicycle of injured Shams ur

Rehman. Vide memo Ex.PW.9/1 the last worn

blood stained garments of deceased Qayum,

and vide memo Exh.PW.9/3 the bloodstained

garments of injured were taken into possession.

*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

He placed on file the medico legal reports of

the injured and postmortem report of the

deceased, sent the bloodstained articles to the

FSL, reports whereof are Exh.PK/1 to

Exh.PK/3. Appellants Fida Muhammad and

Amanullah were arrested by SHO Fayyaz Khan

and Ijaz Khan SI, so he obtained their physical

remand from the court of learned Judicial

Magistrate, interrogated them and during

interrogation, accused Amanullah disclosed

about crime Kalashnikov which was recovered

on his pointation alongwith fix charger

containing 5 live rounds of same vide memo

Exh.PW.2/1. Separate FIR under the Arms

Ordinance was registered against him copy of

which is Exh.PW.13/7. Both the appellants

pointed out the place of occurrence and on their

pointation, pointation memo Exh.PW.2/2 was

prepared. He took into possession registration

slip regarding motorcycle produced by PW

*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

Adnan, attested copy of which is

Exh.PW.13/11. Vide application

Exh.PW.13/13, he sent the crime empties

alongwith the recovered Kalashnikov to the

FSL, report whereof is Exh.PK/4, initiated

proceedings under sections 204 and 87 Cr.P.C

against absconding co-accused Said Ghalib

Shah, and after completion of investigation,

handed over the case file to the SHO, who

submitted challan against the appellants.

6. On receipt of the challan by the learned

Trial Court, appellants were summoned and

formally charge sheeted, to which they pleaded

not guilty and claimed trial. To prove its case,

prosecution examined as many as fourteen

witnesses. After closure of the prosecution

evidence, statements of the appellants were

recorded under section 342 Cr.P.C, wherein

they denied the prosecution allegations and

professed their innocence. They, however,

*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

10

neither wished to be examined on oath nor

opted to produce evidence in defence. On

conclusion of trial, the learned Trial Court, after

hearing both the sides, convicted and sentenced

the appellants as mentioned above, hence, this

appeal.

7. Learned counsel for the appellants

argued that appellants are innocent and have

been implicated falsely on mere suspicions; that

presence of PW Adnan is highly doubtful

because of his dramatic escape, therefore, his

testimony has been wrongly believed and relied

upon by the learned Trial Court while injured

complainant though his presence cannot be

denied on the spot, has not come forward with

true account of the incident as his version does

not find support from the medical evidence and

site plan, hence, mere stamp of injuries on his

person would not be sufficient to believe him

blindly; that injured Shams ur Rehman, who

*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

11

was an independent witness has _ been

abandoned by the prosecution for no good

reason, therefore, adverse inference within the

meaning of Article 129 (g) of the Qanun-e-

Shahadat Order, 1984, would be drawn that had

he been examined, he would not have supported

the prosecution case; that a new motive has

been introduced at belated stage by the PWs;

that the testimony of complainant and PW

Adnan, both father and son inter-se, are not in

line with each other on material aspects of the

incident, they have contradicted each other on

important aspects of the incident, which create

serious doubts in the prosecution case; that the

prosecution has miserably failed to prove the

incident in the mode and manner as alleged in

the FIR; that the peculiar facts and

circumstances of the case suggest that incident

to have been taken place in some other mode

and manner which has been concealed by the

*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

12

PWs and the present appellants have been made

scapegoats hence, by extending them benefit of

doubt, they be acquitted from the charge.

8. Conversely, learned AAG assisted by

learned counsel for the complainant contended

that appellants are directly charged for the

offence by injured complainant in a promptly

lodged report, which has been verified by the

deceased then injured Qayum and injured Sham

ur Rehman; that being a daylight incident and

parties co-villagers, question of mistaken

identity does not arise; that presence of

complainant Momeen Khan having stamp of

injuries on his person cannot be denied; that

PW Adnan being the son of injured, his

presence with his father at the relevant time was

natural as he was ill and was taken to doctor for

medical checkup; that both the PWs have

furnished truthful account of the incident and

are consistent with each other on all material

*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

13

aspects of the incident; that defence badly

failed to shatter their testimony despite their

taxing cross-examination; that medical

evidence and site plan support the version of

the prosecution; that recovery of blood from the

spot, the positive Serologist reports, recovery of

crime empties, Kalashnikov on the pointation

of one of the appellant and positive FSL report

in respect thereof, further corroborate the ocular

account; that the prosecution has successfully

proved the guilt of the appellants through

overwhelming ocular evidence supported by

circumstantial and medical evidence, therefore,

the learned Trial Court was justified by

recording their conviction, to which no

exception can be taken. They sought dismissal

of the appeal.

9. We have given our anxious

consideration to the respective submissions

14

advanced from both the sides and perused the

record carefully.

10. The ocular account of the incident has

been furnished by injured Momin Khan

(PW.11) and Adnan (PW.12). Former is father

of the latter. In his examination-in-chief,

injured Momin Khan (PW.11) reiterated the

same version as advanced by him in his initial

report. He, however, introduced a new motive

that daughter of Aman Ullah appellant was

married to one Rahat Shah, son of absconding

co-accused Said Ghalib Shah, who was bad

named with his son Adnan, as a result, the

present incident was initiated by the accused.

On one hand, this motive has not been alleged

by him in his initial report, while on the other

hand, if we believe the newly introduced

motive to be true, then a disturbing question

which prick our minds is that, if the daughter of

Aman Ullah was bad named with PW Adnan, then

*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

15

PW Adnan should have been the first target of

the appellants keeping in view the norms of

taking revenge of disgrace in the pathan

society, but amazingly, PW Adnan has been let

off despite that he was at the mercy of the

accused and an innocent persons whom they

had no motive had been targeted. At the

relevant time of incident, PW Momin Khan has

been shown driving the motorcycle, while PW

Adnan and Qayum, sitting behind him, on the

same bike. PW Adnan has been shown in

between injured Momin Khan and deceased

Qayum, but he did not sustain any injury

neither from the firing of the accused nor from

the bullets hitting injured Momin and deceased.

For the sake of arguments, if we presume his

escape as a miracle, at least his clothes should

have been smeared with the blood of injured

Momeen and Qayum, but such is not the case

herein, which create serious doubts

*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

16

about the presence of PW Adnan. According to

version of complainant when he sustained

injuries at point “A” as shown in the site plan

he alongwith motorbike and PW Adnan as well

as deceased Qayum fell at point “A-1”, in

which circumstances, PW Adnan at least should

have sustained graze wounds or scratches on

his person. Momin Khan injured (PW.11)

deposed that they left their house at 6.00 p.m.

for Swabi Bazaar and reached there at about

6.20 or 6.15 p.m., but contrary to his version,

Adnan PW.12 says that they left their house for

Swabi Bazaar at about 3.00 p.m. to see doctor

and reached the clinic of the doctor within half

an hour and remained there for an hour or

above. Contrary to PW Adnan, PW Momin

Khan deposed that they had come to Jamal

Medical Center and examined his son Adnan

through Doctor Waheed Khan and remained

there for 20/25 minutes; that they had not

*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

17

purchased any house hold articles at bazaar but

had only purchased medicines for his son which

were available with them at the time of

incident. Same is the version of PW Adnan.

According to him they had only purchased

medicines which were _ fastened with

motorcycle. Neither the alleged medicines have

been produced before the I.O. nor the I.O. had

taken any such medicines from the spot nor

shown in the site plan nor noticed at the time

when the motorcycle of the complainant was

being taken into possession nor has examined

doctor Waheed Khan, who allegedly examined

PW Adnan on the day of incident. The

complainant was confronted with his initial

report by the defence, wherein not a single

word has been stated about any medical

checkup of his son or medicines. Similarly, PW

Adnan was also confronted with his statement

under section 161 Cr.P.C. wherein he has not

*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

18

stated about his medical examination or

medicines, therefore, this aspect of the

testimony of both the PWs amounts to

dishonest improvements, but even then the

presence of PW Adnan has not been established

as neither any record of the clinic of the doctor

has been produced, later on, nor he has been

examined in the witness box to testify to the

extent of visit of the complainant alongwith his

son PW Adnan to his clinic on the day of

occurrence.

11. In light of the above discussed

evidence, we are firm in our view that PW

Adnan was not present on the spot at the time

of incident as he failed to establish his presence

through some strong physical circumstances of

the incident, therefore, he being a procured

witness, cannot be believed and relied upon.

12. So far as PW Momin Khan is

concerned, no doubt, in presence of injuries on

*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

19

his presence, we cannot deny his presence on

the spot, however, we cannot blindly accept his

testimony, unless we find it trustworthy,

confidence inspiring and supported and

corroborated by other strong circumstantial

evidence. In the site plan Exh.PB, the

appellants have been shown on left side of the

complainant party i.e. towards the West. At the

relevant time of the incident complainant

alongwith his companions was proceedings

towards the North from the South on a

motorbike, in which situation the left sides of

the deceased and injured complainant were in

the fire line of the appellants, but firearm entry

wound on the right upper arm near shoulder

joint of the deceased and the other entry wound

on his right side of back chest, falsify the

version of injured complainant. Not disclosing

specifically about the kind of weapon used in

the commission of offence by the accused on

*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

20

the part of the complainant in his initial report

is another circumstance which create doubts

that complainant had not actually seen the

assailants at the time of incident. Empties of

7.62 bore have been recovered from the spot,

which means that a Kalashnikov had been

used in the incident, which is a common

weapon, particularly in our society, and is even

recognized by kids. Had the complainant seen

the assailants he would have specifically

mentioned the kind of weapons in his very

initial report and would not have relieved

himself by just disclosing a general phrase

“firearms”. We have observed in majority of

cases that where the occurrence is unseen, the

complainant usually uses general phrase

“firearms” avoiding the name of specific

weapon keeping in view the subsequent

apprehension of damaging his case by the

medical evidence and recoveries from the spot.

*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

21

The peculiar facts and circumstances of the

case suggests that the incident has not taken

place in the mode and manner as alleged by the

complainant rather in some other mode and he

has not identified the actual assailant/

assailants, therefore, his testimony cannot be

believed and relied upon. It has been held by

the apex court in case titled, “Amin Ali and

another Vs the State” (2011 SCMR 323) that

presence of injured witnesses cannot be

doubted at place of incident but merely because

they had injuries on their person do not stamp

them to be truthful witnesses. Similarly, the

apex court while discussing the credibility of an

injured witness in case titled, “Nazir Ahmad

Vs Muhammad Iqbal and another” (2011

SCMR 527) observed that injuries of a

prosecution witness only indicate his presence

at the spot, but are not affirmative proof of his

credibility and truth. Guidance in this regard

*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

22

can also be derived from Said Ahmed’s case

(1981 SCMR 795) and Muhammad Pervez

case (2007 SCMR 670), Muhammad Hayat

case (1996 SCMR 1411), and case titled,

State Vs Muhammad Raja (PLD 2004

Peshawar 01).

13. As regard alleged recovery of

Kalashnikov on the pointation of appellant

Aman Ullah on 25.06.2011 and positive FSL

report in respect thereof, suffice it to say that the

empties had been recovered on the very first day

of incident on 22.06.2015, but the same had not

been sent to the FSL immediately, rather, these

have been sent to the FSL on 12.07.2011 i.e.

with a delay of 17/18 days after recovery of the

Kalashnikov on 25.06.2011, for which no

plausible explanation has been furnished by the

prosecution as to where the Kalashnikov and the

empties remained for this long period and

whether these were in safe hands or not. In

*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

23

absence of any such explanation, and when the

direct evidence of the prosecution has already

been disbelieved by us, the mere positive FSL

report, would not advance the prosecution case.

Similarly, autopsy report of the deceased,

recovery of blood from the spot, bloodstained

garments of the deceased and injured coupled

with positive Serologist report, would not be

sufficient to prove the guilt of the appellants in

absence of substantive evidence. Such pieces of

evidence are always taken into consideration

alongwith the substantive evidence as

confirmatory and corroborative evidence, which

in isolation would not be sufficient for recording

conviction in a capital charge. In this regard

reference can be made to Riaz Ahmed’s case (2010

SCMR 846). As per the dictum of the apex Court,

corroborative evidence is meant to test the veracity

of ocular evidence. Both corroborative evidence and

ocular testimony are to be read together and

24

not in isolation. Wisdom in this regard may be

derived from Ijaz Ahmed’s case (1997 SCMR

1279 and Asadullah’s case (PLD 1971 SC

541). It has been held by the apex Court in case

titled, “Saifullah Vs the State” (1985 SCMR

410), that when there is no eyewitness to be

relied upon, then there is nothing, which can be

corroborated by the recovery. Similarly, in case

titled, “Riaz Masih Vs the State” 1995 SCMR

1730, the honourable apex Court held that

recovery of crime weapon by itself is not

sufficient for conviction on murder charge. The

same view has been expressed by the apex Court

in Saifullah’s case (1985 SCMR 410).

14. For what has been discussed above, the

learned Trial Court by not properly appreciating

the evidence, reached to erroneous conclusion

by holding the appellants guilty of the offence.

Resultantly, we by allowing this appeal, set

aside the conviction and sentences of the

*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

25

appellants recorded and awarded by the learned

Trial Court vide impugned judgment

dated17.09.2012, and hereby acquit the

appellants of the charges leveled against them.

They be set at liberty forthwith, if not required

in any other case.

These are reasons of our short order of even

date.

Announced
25.06.2015.

JUDGE

JUDGE

*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

26
*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

27
