Nawab

JUDGMENT SHEET

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
MINGORA BENCH (DAR-UL-QAZA), SWAT
(Judicial Department)

Cr.M B.A. No. 253-M/2017.
JUDGMENT
Date of hearing: 15.6.2017

Petitioner:- (Rahim Said) by Syed _ Fayaz
Muhammad Qazi, Advocate.

Respondents:- (the State & I another) by Mr.
Rafig Ahmad, Astt: Advocate General_and Mr.

ITkramullah Khan, Advocate.

MOHAMMAD IBRAHIM KHAN, J.-. Rahim Said

is charged in FIR No. 268 dated 17.5.2017
under sections 336,341 PPC registered at Police
Station Samarbagh District Dir Lower and is

optimistic for the grant of his post arrest bail.

2. Prior to, an application for the
similar relief before the Court of learned
Additional Sessions Judge/Izafi Zila Qazi
Samarbagh at Dir Lower, which was dismissed

on 27.5.2017.

3. The report lodged by the
complainant Mst. Lal Meena who by that time

was accompanied by her father Taj Muhammad
Nawab

Khan and Mst. Saima Bibi in injured condition
reported that Mst. Bachai Lal and her sons had
closed the passage by blocking it through tree.
In order to open the path they were asked which
infuriated Mst. Bachai Lal, Sadiquellah and
Rahim Said and started pelting stones, which hit
the complainant on her right side of forehead,
while her sister Mst. Saima Bibi was got injured
on her left eye. The occurrence is stated to have
been witnessed by Shafiullah and Rafiullah

brothers of the complainant.

4. Having heard arguments of learned
counsel for the Petitioner, learned counsel for
the complainant and learned Astt: Advocate
General for the State, record with their

assistance gone through.

5. Learned counsel for the Petitioner

relied on 2015 P Cr. LJ 747 (Sindh) “ Shan vs
the State”, 2017 YLR 335 (Peshawar Mingora
Bench) “ Saeed Ahmad _ ys Amjad _Ali_and
another”, 2015 P Cr.LJ 1433 (Sindh) “ Baber

Gul_vs_ the State” and 2017 MLD 599
Nawab

(@eshawar_ Abbottabad Bench) “ Khalid vs

Mst. Akbar Jan and another”. In the light of
these dictums of the Honorable superior Courts
prayed for the grant of bail. Inversely learned
counsel for the complainant assisted by learned
A.A.G_ referred to 2017 SCMR_ 364 “
Muhammad Sarfaraz vs the State and others”
and opposed the grant of bail in favour of the
Petitioner as he has been directly charged for
inflicting injury on vital part of the injured Mst.
Saima Bibi, due to which she has partially lost

her eyesight.

6. This case has been registered under
section 336 PPC, which pertains to punishment,
provides for  itlaf-i-salahiyyati-i-udw, this
offence is defined under section 335, which

reads as under:-

itlaf-i-salahiyyati-i-udw whoever destroys or

permanently impairs the functioning, power or
capacity of an organ of the body of another
person, or causes permanent disfigurement is

said to cause itlaf-i-salahiyyati-i-udw.
Nawab

7. There are specific allegations
against the accused/Petitioner that he has felted
stones which hit Mst. Saima Bibi on her left
eye. The medical report would further suggest
that the Ophthalmologist who examined the
patient opined that she has got serious injury on
her left eye as her sight and power of vision is
decreased. The Petitioner being charged in
person there is no chance of misidentification
as the pelted stones is said to have caused injury
which has decreased the sight and has affected
badly the eyesight even some permanent
disfigurement may have been caused. The
victim is a young girl of the age 15/16 years. It
has been held in 2017 SMR 364 “ Muhammad
Sarfaraz_vs_ the State and others” an appeal
which was dismissed causing of an injury to an
eye partially loss of vision declared by
Ophthalmologist loss of vision permanent and
could not be cured through surgery. The type of
punishment would come under section 335

PPC.
Nawab

8. In all probabilities, the Petitioner is
not entitled to the concession of bail, hence this

petition stands dismissed.

Announced

Dt: 15.06.2017. JUDGE
