aa

_ Nawab

JUDGMENT SHEET

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
MINGORA BENCH (DAR-UL-QAZA), SWAT
(Judicial Department)

Cr.M B.A. No. 387-M/2017.
JUDGMENT
Date of hearing: 13.09.2017

Petitioner:-_(Muhammad Ibrahim) by Mr.
Rashid Ali Khan, Advocate.

Respondents:- (the State & I another) by Mr.

Rafig Ahmad, Astt: Advocate General and Mr.
Safdar Khan, Advocate.

MOHAMMAD IBRAHIM KHAN, J.-_ The order

dated 29.07.2017 passed by the learned Judicial
Magistrate-1/Illaga Qazi Timergara describing
the facts, “the Petitioner being habitual
offender, on his implication in another case
regarding dishonor of his cheque and being
proceeded against under section 512 Cr.P.C,
prima facie connected with the commission of
offence," thereby application for the grant of

post arrest bail was dismissed.

2. The matter was then taken up before
the Court of learned Sessions Judge/Zila Qazi

Dir Lower at Timergara in case No. 260 of
NOU

Nawab

2
2017, the fate of the application was decided in
the light of observations of the learned Judicial
Magistrate, "the offence being punishable for 3
years but because of involvement of the
Petitioner previously in similar nature of

offences," the application was disallowed.

3. This bail petition is, therefore,
preferred in case FIR No. 562 dated 18.12.2016
under section 489-F PPC registered at Police
Station Talash District Dir Lower, taking
grounds taken from Serial (i) to (x) based the
prayer:-
“It is, therefore, humbly prayed that on
acceptance of this petition the
accused/Petitioner may kindly be released
on bail till final disposal of the instant
case.”
4. Wahid Murad making his report in

the manner having business pursuits following

- sale of vehicles, he was handed over a cheque

for an amount of Rs. 14,30,000/- by the

accused/Petitioner Muhammad Ibrahim, which
he

Nawab

3

was dishonored because of insufficient funds in

the account of the accused/Petitioner.

5. Having heard arguments of learned
counsel for the Petitioner, learned counsel for
the complainant and learned Astt: Advocate
General for the State, record with their valuable

assistance gone through.

6. Learned counsel for the Petitioner

placed reliance on 2014 YER 497 (Sindh) “
Syed Qamar Alam vs the State”, 2013 MLD
1238 (Lahore) “ Naseer Ahmad vs the State
and_ others”, PLD 2013 Lahore 173 “ Abdul
Sattar vs the State and another”, unreported
judgment of this Court delivered in Cr.M B.A.
No. 215 of 2017 “ Ezat Khan vs the State & 1
another, 2014 _ P CrLJ_ 1060 (Peshawar)
“Muhammad Igqbal_Khan_vs_ the State and
another”, 2017 P Cr.LJ Note 34 (Peshawar) “
Haji_Sardar_Ali_vs_ Yar Muhammad _and
another”, 2011 SCMR 1708 “ Riaz Jafar Natiq

vs Muhammad Nadeem Dar and others” and

unreported judgment of this Court delivered in
Nawab

4
Cr.M B.A. No. 161-M of 2017 “ Sabz Ali vs the
State” and thereby prayed for the grant of bail.
Inversely, learned counsel for the complainant
assisted by learned A.A.G. appearing on behalf
of the State referred to 2009 SCMR 174 “
Shameel__Ahmed__vs___the___State.”. They
vehemently opposed the grant of bail in favour
of the Petitioner as he has been previously
involved in alike offences thus his conduct
squarely falls within the ambit of habitual

offender.

7. There are some judgments in the
above cited cases authored by this Court as well
as some of the judgments of the Hon’ble
superior Courts including the Hon’ble principal
seat at Peshawar, wherein it has been held that
the offence under section 489-F PPC provided a
maximum punishment of three years and it does
not fall within the prohibitory clause of section
497 (1) Cr. P.C. Accused was behind bars for
more than a month. Investigation in the case
was complete. Case was ready for trial and as

such accused was no more required by police
no?

Nawab

for further investigation. Accused was granted
bail. Even in previous cases an accused whose
bail bonds have been forfeited, where there is a
case of further inquiry and the accused making a
case for bail on merits, mere abscondence
would not come in his way while granting bail.
Similar view has already been taken for the
grant of bail even despite involvement of the
accused/Petitioner in other cases of alike nature,
particularly when there is no_ previous
conviction, mere implication in other criminal
cases will stand as hurdle in the way of
releasing of the accused/Petitioner on bail. The
latest view_of the Hon’ble Supreme Court _of
Pakistan_in Criminal Appeal No. 273 of 2017
has altogether formed a distinguishable view
that for the offence when an accused has been
charged does not attract the prohibitory clause,
there can be no strong reason to withhold the
concession of bail, as grant of bail in such like

cases is a rule and refusal is an exception.

8. In view of the above observations

which are no doubt purely tentative in nature,
ne

k

Nawab

6
the Petitioner is entitled to the concession of
bail. Hence he is asked to furnish bail bonds in
the sum of Rs. 700,000/- (Rupees seven lacs)
with two sureties each in the like amount to the
satisfaction of learned Trial Court, who shall
ensure that the sureties are local, reliable and

men of means.

9, These are the reasons of my short

po —
Announced eo

Dt: 13.09.2017. Mohammad Ibrahim Khan
JUDGE

order of even date.
Wy Alt me

JUDGMENT SHEET
. IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
MINGORA BENCH (DAR-UL-QAZA), SWAT
(Judicial Department)
Cr.M.B.A. No. 387-M/2017.
JUDGMENT
Date ofhearing: 13.09.2017.

Petitioner:- (Muhammad Ibrahim) by Mr. Rashid
Ali Khan, Advocate.

Respondents:-_(the State & 1 another) by Mr. Rafiq
Ahmad, Astt: Advocate General and Mr. Safdar

Khan, Advocate.

MOHAMMAD IBRAHIM KHAN, J:- For reasons to
be recorded later on in the detailed judgment, this
application for bail is allowed and _ accused/
petitioner Muhammad Ibrahim involved in case FIR No.
562 dated 18.12.2016 charged under section 489-F PPC
registered at Police Station Talash District Dir Lower is
directed to be released on bail provided he furnishes bail
bonds in the sum of Rs.700,000/- (Rupees seven Lacs)
with two sureties each in the like amount to the
satisfaction of learned trial Court, who shall ensure that

the sureties are local, reliable and men of means. .

Announced, wad
Dt: 13.09.2017. oa

Mohammad Ibrahim Khan
JUDGE
