JUDGMENT SHEET
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
BANNU BENCH
(Judicial Department)
Cr: Mise: BA No. 482-B / 2023
Muhammad Ijaz & another.
Versus
The State .

JUDGMENT

Date ofhearing 02.10.2023.

For petitioner: M/s. Bashir Khan Wazir
Advocate (through video Link)
and Dost Ali, Advocate.

For the State: Syed Fakhr-ud-Din Shah,
DAG.

FORK

FAZAL SUBHAN, J.--- Instant is post arrest bail

petition of petitioners Muhammad Ijaz Khan son of
Shah Qasim and Aziz ur Rehman son of: Wilayat
Khan, who are charged in case FIR No.44/2023 dated
20.9.2023 registered under sections 4,5/23 Foreign
Exchange Regulation Act, 1947 of police station
FIA/CC, Bannu.

2. In this case Tahir Khan SI, FIA/CC,
Bannu had information of running the business of
illegal foreign currency exchange at Khan Travel
shop No. 21 Regal Cinema Market District Bannu,
whereafter he along with raiding party went to the

said shop and after introduction, the shop was
searched and Pakistani currency 15,75,500/- and
UAE Dirham 10,000/- and a booklet containing list
of names of persons who were to receive the amount
of Hundi/Hawala were recovered. As the accused
present in shape namely Muhammad Ijaz and Aziz-
ur-Rehman failed to produce any legal justification
for running the foreign currency business, hence they
were found prima facie connected with the offence
under the above referred sections of law, hence
mursila was sent to the police station and resultantly
the instant FIR was registered.

3. With this background of the case
arguments of learned counsel for petitioners and
learned DAG for the State heard.

4. After hearing arguments and _ tentative
assessment of record it is clear that at present it is not
established on record that the present petitioners
Muhammad Ijaz and Aziz-ur-Rehman are the actual
owners of the business known as Khan Travel. At the
relevant time Pakistani currency of 15,75,500/- has
been recovered, however, keeping Pakistani currency
is not a crime under the relevant law. So far as the

recovery of UAE Dirham 10,000/- are concerned, at
present the murasila is silent that at the relevant time
the petitioners were actually busy in the transaction
of Hundi/Hawala. The prosecution has recorded the
statement of one Naimat Ullah Khan, who allegedly
had received UAE Dirham 1200/- on 25.8.2023 from
Khan Travel at the instance and direction of one
Tahir Ullah Khan, however, at the time of arrest the
said Naimat Ullah Khan is not shown to have been
present at the shop of Khan Travel nor he is shown
to have received any foreign currency from the
petitioners to prove their dealing in the foreign
currency exchange. Though some extracts of register
were placed on file but the same are yet to be
confirmed that these have been used for the purpose
of Hundi/Hawala. The offence for which the
petitioners are charged also does not fall within the
prohibitory clause of section 497 Cr.P.C and in such
like cases grant of bail is a rule and refusal is an
exception and as no exceptional ground has been
shown, therefore, petitioners are entitled for the grant
of bail. In this respect reliance can be placed on the
case law reported in 2020 SCMR Supreme Court 717,

wherein it has been held as under:-
“After hearing the learned counsel
for the petitioner and learned
Additional Prosecutor General at
length and perusal of available
record, it has been observed by us
that the offence alleged against the
petition falls outside the prohibitory
clause of section 497, Code of
Criminal Procedure. Grant of bail in
such like cased is a rule and refusal
an exception. No extraordinary
circumstances are available on
record for refusing bail in the
petitioner.”

Similarly, in a case registered under Foreign
Exchange Regulation reported in 20/5 P.Cr.L.J
Peshawar 478 this Court while granting bail to the
petitioner has held that:-

“In any case, the offence with which
the accused/petitioner is charged
carries maximum penalty of two years
imprisonment or fine or both, thus not
only entitling the accused/petitioner
to the concession of bail as of right as
in case of imposition of only fine on
him, refusal of bail to him and his
remaining in jail as a consequence
thereof would amount to double
jeopardy; but also making the
accused/petitioner entitled for bail on
the ground that the offence falls
outside the scope of prohibitory
clause contained in section 497,
Cr.P.C., notwithstanding the fact that
mandatory provision of law contained
in the Foreign Exchange Regulation
Act, 1947 in respect of search and
recovery have, apparently, not been
complied with.”
5. For the above mentioned reasons and
while relying on the above judgments this petition is
accepted and the petitioners are released on bail
provided they furnishes bail bonds of Rs.5,00,000/-
(Rupees Five Lac) each with two local and reliable
sureties each in the like amount to the satisfaction of
trial Court/ Illaqa Judicial Magistrate) MOD
concerned.

These are the detailed reasons of my short
order of even date.

Announced.
02.10.2023. Le +>

*Ihsan*
JUDGE

(S.B)
Hon'ble Mr. Justice Fazal Subhan

06 OCT 2

tr 5
