JUDGMENT SHEET

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
BANNU BENCH.

(Judicial Department)

BA No.101-B of 2017

Habibullah
Vs
The State etc.

JUDGMENT

Date of hearing 25.05.2017

Appellant-Petitioner: | By Mr. Farooq Khan Sokari, M.

Yaqoob_Khan Marwat_ & M. Rasheed Khan Dirma Khel
Advocate.

Respondent : By Pir Liaqat Ali Shah, Salah-ud-Din
Marwat & Inam Ullah Khan Kakki

Advocate.
State by SHahid Hameed Qureshi, Addl:
AG.

ISHTIAQ IBRAHIM, _J.--- Through this common

judgment/ order, I would like to dispose of this BA No.101-
B/2017, BA No.105-B/2017 and BA No. 122-B/2017,
arising out of three different FIRs, as in all the three cases
bail is sought mainly on the ground of acquittal of co-
accused.

° Cr. Misc:/B.A_ No. 101-B/2017.
-2-

The petitioner Habibullah seeks his release on

bail in case F.I.R No. 148 dated 13/05/1998 under sections

302/324/34 P.P.C, registered at Police Station Mandan. The

allegation against the accused/ petitioner is that on

13.05.1998 at 10.30 hours, he alongwith acquitted co-

accused Mohammad Naeem, Mushk-e-Alam and Dilasa

Khan armed with Kalashnikovs, started firing at the

complainant party, as a result of which Abdul Majeed,

Aleem Khan hit and died at the spot, while Asghar Ali and

Two unknown passengers alongwith driver of the motorcar

sustained injuries.

° Cr. Misc: /B.A No. 105-B/2017.

The petitioner Abbas Khan seeks his release

on bail in case F.I.R No. 247 dated 18.09.2012 under

sections 302/324/404/34 P.P.C, registered at Police Station

Dadi Wala, Lakki Marwat. The allegation against the

accused/ petitioner is that he alongwith absconding co-

accused Nazar Gul and acquitted co-accused Umer Gul

armed with Kalashnikovs started firing at complainant

party, as a result of which Naeem Khan got hit and died at
-3-

the spot, while complainant Akhter Zaman and Sherdallah

escaped unhurt. The accused also take away double barrel

riffle and a 30 bore pistol of deceased.

° Cr. Misc:/B.A No. 122-B/2017.

The petitioner Hameed Khan seeks his release

on bail in case F.I.R No. 56 dated 27.05.2004 under

sections 302/324/34 P.P.C, registered at Police Station

Haved Bannu. The allegation against the accused/ petitioner

is that he alongwith acquitted co-accused Naseeb Khan,

Nekam Khan and Mehboob Khan armed with Kalashnikovs

started firing at the complainant party, as a result of which

Khumar Ali was hit and died at the spot, while complainant

Raziullah Khan and Murad Ali Khan escaped unhurt.

2. Learned counsel representing the petitioners

argued that co-accused in their respective cases have been

acquitted after full dressed trial; that when once the

evidence of co-accused has been disbelieved, then the same

evidence with respect to other accused having same role

also cannot be believed, therefore, as there is no chance of

conviction of accused/ petitioners in subsequent trial, their
-4-

case falls within the ambit of further inquiry. Keeping the

accused/petitioners behind the bars would serve no fruitful

purpose. If on merits, the case of accused/ petitioners is one

of further inquiry their liberty cannot be curtailed on the

sole ground of abscondence. Learned counsel for accused/

petitioners relied on cases cited in 2016 SCMR 762: 2017 P

Cr.LJ 10; 2016 YLR 244 and 2016 P Cr.LJ 1523.

3. Learned A.A.G appearing for state assisted by

learned counsel for complainants, with respect to their

cases, argued that accused/ petitioners are directly charged

for committing qatl-e-amd and attempted to commit qatl-e-

Amd. There is no chance of misidentification or false

implication, as the occurrence took place in all the cases in

broad day light and the matters were reported promptly;

that mere acquittal of co-accused in earlier trial is no

ground for releasing the accused/ petitioners arrested

subsequently, as each and every case is to be decided at its

own merits, neither the evidence recorded during the trial of

co-accused can be considered in case of co-accused arrested

subsequently at his bail stage nor during his trial; that
-5-

absconsion of accused/ petitioners for a sufficient long time

also a step connecting them with the commission of

offence. Learned counsel for complainant relied upon the

cases cited in 1985 SCMR 382; 2016 MLD 818 and 2014

PCr.LJ 636.

4. Arguments heard and record gone through

with the valuable assistance of learned counsel for the

parties.

5. Record reveals that in all the cases accused/

petitioners are charged directly by name in the first

information report by giving them specific role of firing at

the deceased and others. After commission of offence all

the accused/ petitioners went into hiding, while trials

against their co-accused have been completed and

ultimately they were acquitted. Now the accused/

petitioners seek their release on bail on the sole ground of

acquittal of their co-accused.

6. True that in all cases co-accused have been

acquitted at an earlier trial held before different courts, but

whether acquittal of co-accused would entitle the
-6-

accused/petitioners for concession of bail, who were

arrested subsequently sitting on the fence, while watching

the proceedings of their co-accused, who were arrested or

surrendered earlier and faced the trial as an under trial

prisoners. Answer is in negative, as evidence recorded in

absence of accused/ petitioners in the case of their acquitted

co-accused cannot be taken into consideration, neither at

bail stage nor during trial. Fate of the case of the accused/

petitioners would be decided on the evidence recorded in

their presence and believing or disbelieving of evidence is

the exclusive domain of trial court, where it will form its

own opinion after recording of evidence in presence of the

accused/ petitioners. It is not necessary that the trial court

will come to same conclusion which was arrived at the trial

of co-accused. In this respect case of “Sardar Vs_ State”

(PLD 1979 Peshawar 16) can favorably be reproduced as

below:-

“Accused/ petitioner remaining outlaw
after occurrence for about eight years and
his trial to be held independently of
previous trial resulting in acquittal of his

co-accused. Contention that other
-7-

accused in case having been acquitted
and evidence being same in both cases,
petitioner exonerated from charge of
murder. Held. Not correct. Acceptance of
contention amounts to examining of
witnesses in petitioner’s case as a matter
of mere formality or there being no need
to examine such witnesses for reason of
such evidence having already been taken
into consideration in previous case and
such course not permissible in law. Bail

application rejected.”

7. Learned counsel for petitioners relied on the

judgment of this court rendered in BA No.211-B/2015 and

BA No.36-B/2017 by submitting that bail was granted to

the petitioners on the ground that their co-accused were

already acquitted in earlier trial. I think learned counsel for

petitioners have misconceived the situation, as the bail to

the petitioners in those cases was not granted on the sole

ground of acquittal of co-accused, rather it was taken as

supportive ground apart from other reasonable grounds.

This case is at different footing to that of case relied upon

by learned counsel for accused/ petitioners, therefore, is

distinguished.
-8-

8. Learned counsel for accused/ petitioners

pressed strong reliance on the judgment of august Supreme

Court cited in titled “Chairman NAB through PGA NAB

Islamabad Vs Muhammad Khalid” (2016 SCMR 676

wherein it is observed that:

“The mere fact that co-accused of the
respondent have been acquitted may
not be sufficient ground for granting
him bail but it has created dent at
present to the extent which has made
the case of the respondent of further

inquiry.”

In the above cited judgment, the case before august apex

court was cancellation of bail, which has totally different

criterion then grant of bail. The cited case transpires that

co-accused, main beneficiary of the offence and other co-

accused, who transferred the misappropriated money into

account of accused have been acquitted, while role of

accused/petitioner in that case was milder than the acquitted

co-accused, as misappropriated money was transferred into

a loan account belonging to the accused. Moreover, the

cited case was with respect to misappropriation of amount
-9-

where case rests on documentary evidence, while in present

cases the accused/ petitioners are charged for offence of

committing Qatl-e-amd and attempted to commit Qatl-e-

Amd, where the prosecution case mainly rests on ocular

account, so a line of distinction is to be drawn in between

the cases resting on documentary evidence and ocular

account, hence, the case of accused/ petitioners are

distinguishable from the case cited by learned counsel for

petitioners, hence not attracted to the facts of the present

cases.

9. While reliance can reasonably be placed on

case titled “Ibrahim Vs Hayat Gul and others” (1985

SCMR 382), wherein bail cancellation application petition

was accepted by the apex court and bail of the accused/

respondent Hayat Gul was recalled by holding that:

“Learned counsel also tried to show that the
respondent couldn’t now be found guilty
because the eye-witnesses who are to appear
against him, as he understood, have already
been disbelieved during the trial of his co-
accused. In the circumstances of this case it
is not necessary to examine at length this

aspect as it might prejudice the decision of
-10-

the trial Court as a result of a trial which the
respondent is going to face. Suffice it
however to observe that in so far as the
believing or not believing a certain piece of
evidence is concerned the trial Court would
be entitled to form its own opinion. Moreover
a possibility of additional evidence examined
at the instance of the parties or the Court at
the second trial and/or the admission by the
accused under section 342 during this trial
which might —_ furnish corroboratory
/confirmatory/additional material can never
be excluded on account of any bar by any law
or principle. And to say the least the very
factum of abscondence would ordinarily be
led as additional evidence against the
respondent which item would be in addition
to the evidence led during the trial of his co-
accused and it cannot at all even be urged
that evidence of abscondence is not relevant

in cases like the present one.”

10. On merits, tentative assessment would show

that accused/ petitioners are directly nominated in their

respective first information reports by the complainants

with their respective roles. Medico-legal/ post mortem

reports, recoveries of empties from their respective spots,

motive, ocular account of PWs and _ longstanding

abscondence prima facie connect the accused/petitioners
-ll-

with the commission of offence, falls under prohibitory

clause of section 497(1) Cr.PC.

11. Moreover, investigation in the cases is almost

complete and trial is about to commence in the near future,

but in the meanwhile, case file was requisitioned by this

Court in connection with the instant petitions. Much has

been argued before me from either side, but discussion on

all these points would amount to deeper appreciation of

evidence which has always been deprecated by the Hon’ble

Superior Courts at bail stage.

12. Admittedly and as is evident from the record

accused/ petitioners remained absconder after the

occurrence for a considerable long period and after acquittal

of their co-accused, they have surrendered. Prima facie it

appears that the petitioners/ accused were waiting for the

acquittal of their co-accused. If, in the attending

circumstances of the case, they are granted bail merely due

to acquittal of co-accused, then most of the accused would

remain fugitive from law during disposal of the case of their

co-accused. Wisdom is derived from the case of “Atlas
-12-
Khan Vs Mazamullah Khan and another” (1989 PCr.
LJ_2044 Peshawar), where it is held that the accused who
absconded after the occurrence for noticeable period, would
not be invariably entitled to bail merely because his
co-accused had been acquitted in the case.

13. For afore stated reasons, all the three petitions
for the grant of bail stand dismissed. However, prosecution
is directed to submit the challan in the competent court
within a stipulated period provided by law.

Announced.
26.05.2017

*Azam/P.S*

JUDGE
