JUDGMENT SHEET

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
ABBOTTABAD BENCH.

(Judicial Department)

Cr. Misc:BA No. 57-B of 2017.

Chan Zeb
Vs
The state

JUDGMENT

Date of hearing 10.5.2017

Appellant-Petitioner

Respondent

SYED MUAHMMAD ATTIQUE SHAH, J:-

Accused / petitioner Chan Zaib involved in case FIR

No.05 dated 13.9.1999, registered under section 9 (C)

CNSA read with section 3/4 P.O at Police Station

ANF Haripur, was refused bail by the learned Judge

Special Court (CNS) Peshawar, vide order dated
21.12.2016. Hence the instant bail petition for his

release on bail.

2. As per first information report 15

kilogram chars, 300 grams heroin, etc were recovered

from the house of co-accused namely Liaq Khan and

the present accused/petitioner was charged by the

police on the statement of co-accused Liaq Khan.

3. I have heard arguments of learned

counsel for the petitioner, A.A.G for the State and

gone through the record with their valuable

assistance.

4. Perusal of the record reveals that the

only material available on the record of the case,

which implicates the accused/petitioner in the

present case, is the statement of co-accused namely

Liaq Khan. Under Article 38 of Qanun-e-Shahadat

Order, 1984, admission of an accused before the
police cannot be used as evidence against the other

co-accused. The record of the case shows that nothing

has been recovered from the direct possession of

accused / petitioner and the house from where the

alleged contraband was recovered belongs to co-

accused Liaq Khan. No doubt, the accused/ petitioner

remained absconder for sufficient long time but mere

abscondance would not disentitle him for grant of

bail, if otherwise on merits the case of

accused /petitioner is covered by subsection 2 of

section 497 Cr.P.C. In this respect wisdom is drawn

from judgment of apex Court reported in PLD 2012

Supreme Court 222.

“Tt has vehemently been argued by the learned
Additional Prosecutor-General, Punjab
appearing for the State that the petitioner had
remained a Proclaimed Offender for a period of
about four years and, thus, he is not entitled to
any indulgence in the matter of bail. We have,
however, not felt persuaded to agree with the
learned Additional Prosecutor-General in this
regard. It has already been held by this Court in
the cases of Ibrahim v. Hayat Gul and others
(1985 SCMR 382) and Muhammad Sadiq v.
Sadig and others (PLD 1985 SC 182) that in
a case calling for further inquiry into the guilt
of an accused person bail is to be allowed to him
as of right and such right cannot be refused to
him merely on account of his alleged
abscondance which is a factor relevant only to
propriety.”

5. Investigation of this case has already

been finalized, and challan has been completed,

therefore, the accused/petitioner is no longer

required to the prosecution for investigation at this

stage and his continued incarceration is not likely to

serve any beneficial purpose. For the above discussed

reasons this Court reached to the conclusion that the

case against the accused/petitioner calls for further

inquiry into his guilt within the purview of

subsection (2) of section 497 Cr.P.C.

6. In view of above, there is a wide scope of

further inquiry into the guilt of accused/ petitioner,

resultantly he is admitted to bail on furnishing bail
bonds, amounting to Rs.1,00,000/-(One Lac) with two

sureties each in the like amount to the satisfaction of

Illaqa Judicial Magistrate/ MOD concerned.

7. These are the detailed reasons of the

short order of even date.

Announced.
10.5.2017.
Aftab/* JUDGE
