Nawab

JUDGMENT SHEET

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
MINGORA BENCH (DAR-UL-QAZA), SWAT
(Judicial Department)

Cr.M.BA. No. 88-M/2017.
CONSOLIDATED JUDGMENT
Date of hearing: 11.04.2017.

Petitioner: - (Saif-ur-Rahman) by Mr. Sajjad

Anwar, Advocate.

Respondent: - (the State & 1 another) by Mr.
Rafig Ahmad, Astt: Advocate General and_Mr.
Misraf Advocate.

MOHAMMAD IBRAHIM KHAN, J.- By this

singled-out order Criminal Miscellaneous B.A.
No. 88-M of 2017 titled "Saif-ur-Rahman_ys
the State & I another", Criminal
Miscellaneous Bail Cancellation Petition No. 2-
M of 2017 titled "Sahib Roz Khan vs the State"
and Criminal Miscellaneous Bail Cancellation
Petition No. 14-M of 2017 titled " the State vs

Wali Rahman" are considered for disposal.

2. All these Petitions pertain to case
FIR No. 828 dated 09.10.2015 charged under
sections 302, 34 PPC & 15 A.A registered at

Police Station Dagger District Buner.
Nawab

3. Earlier Saif-ur-Rahman Petitioner
herein had filed his Petition for the grant of bail
before the Court of learned Additional Sessions
Judge-II/Izafi Zila Qazi Buner at Dagger, which
was dismissed on 18.02.2017. The Petition of
Wali-ur-Rahman for the grant of bail was
considered who has since been enlarged on bail
on furnishing bail bonds amounting to
Rs. 200,000/- (Rupees two lacs) with two
sureties each in the like amount to the
satisfaction of the same learned Court of
Additional Sessions Judge/Izafi Zila Qazi-II
Buner. For bail cancellation not only the
complainant Sahib Roz Khan but the State also
moved separate Bail Cancellation Petitions for
recalling of the order dated 03.01.2017 on the
ground that the said impugned order is perverse,
fanciful and without appreciation of the lawful

concerns.

4. Pertaining to the occurrence
happened on 09.10.2015 at 08.00 A.M the
Investigation Incharge of Police Station Dagger

received an information that at a place known as
Nawab

Pahai Chaina Hotel Dost Muhammad Khan a
renowned Advocate has been killed by firing at
him. The complainant Sahib Roz Khan reported
that his uncle Dost Muhammad Khan, Advocate
was a practicing lawyer in District Courts
Buner. As usual on the doomful day he was on
his way to the Courts at Dagger and by that time
admittedly the complainant was present in his
house. Later, he received an information from
one Habib-ur-Rahman that his uncle Dost
Muhammad Khan, Advocate has been killed at
a place Pahai Chaina Hotel, where he was
taking tea. There two persons came whose
names and place of residence are not known and
resorted to firing at Dost Muhammad Khan who
was hit, died there and then. At the time this
information was received, the complainant
rushed to the place of occurrence and found the
corpus of his deceased uncle who had received
bullets on his left shoulder, left side throat, near
the left ear and on his face. Besides some
injuries were found on back of his head. By the

time this report was made it was said about that
Nawab

the deceased had no enmity with anyone,
however some 4/5 years back son of
Niamatullah by the name of Zahid was injured
for whom Shoaib and others were charged, who
are nephews of the said deceased Dost
Muhammad Khan, Advocate. Later those
accused being nephews of Dost Muhammad
Khan, Advocate were acquitted of the charges.
But surely by the time when the report was
made the complainant was unaware as to who
had killed his deceased uncle Dost Muhammad
Khan, Advocate. At the footnote of the
‘Murasila’ followed by the First Information
Report would reveal that the complainant at the
time of making report had himself stated that as
and when he received an information regarding
the real culprits then on full satisfaction he will

charge the accused.

5. Having heard arguments of the
learned counsel for the Petitioner Saif-ur-
Rahman, learned Astt: Advocate General for the
State, learned counsel for the complainant Sahib

Roz Khan and learned counsel for the
Nawab

accused/Respondent Wali-ur-Rahman, record

was delved deep into with their valuable

assistance.
6. Learned counsel for the Petitioner
relied on 2008 SCMR 1556 "Noor

Muhammad vs the State", 2017 SCMR 114 "

Ehsan-ul-Haq alias Shani_vs_the State_and
others", 2012 SCMR 184 " Allah Ditta vs the
State and others", 2013 YLR 381 (Peshawar) "
Lugqman alias _Pehlawan _vs_ Daud _and

another" and 2008 P Cr. L J 726 (Peshawar) "

Saeed vs the State and another" and thereby
prayed for the grant of bail. Inversely learned
counsel for the accused/Respondent Wali-ur-

Rahman referred to 2016 SCMR_ 676

Ld

‘Chairman __NAB _ through PGA __NAB
Islamabad vs Muhammad Khalid", 2016 MLD
2036 (Peshawar D.I. Khan Bench) " Hussain
through Mother vs the State and another",
2016 SCMR 18 " Zaigham Ashraf vs the State
and other" _and__2016 SCMR_1520_"'
Muhammad Aslam ys the State and others". In

the light of these dictums of the Hon'ble
Nawab

superior Courts prayed for utter dismissal of the
Bail Cancelation Petitions. Similarly learned
counsel for the complainant Sahib Roz Khan
placed reliance on 2004 SCMR__ 283
"Naseem Malik _vs_ the State", 2006 SCMR
1292 "Raja Muhammad Irshad vs Muhammad
Bashir Goraya and others" , 2012 SCMR 1945
"Muhammad _Yousaf Butt_vs_ P.C. Abdul
Lateef Shar_and_another", PLJ 2016 Cr.C
(Peshawar) 784 _" Nisar Muhammad ys State
through Additional Advocate General Dar-ul-
Qaza Swat and another", 2013 SCMR 385 "

Ghulam Ahmed Chishti_vs_ the State and

another", 2015 P Cr. L J 628 " Shahid Zafar
and_ others vs _ the State”, PLD 2004 Lahore
829 “ Rehmat Shah Afridi vs the State” and
PLD 2004 Supreme Court 822 “ Sardar Munir

Ahmed _ Dogar _vs_the State” and thereby

vehemently opposed the grant of bail in favour
of the accused/Petitioner and also requested for
acceptance of his Bail Cancellation Petition
preferred against the bail granting order of

accused/Respondent Wali-ur-Rahman.
Nawab

7. Let the time spent on collecting the
information and after being satisfaction the
complainant Sahib Roz Khan recorded his
statement under section 164 Cr.P.C on
16.11.2016. In support of the statement Amir
Bahader, Said Zafar Ali Shah and Bacha Khan
recorded their statements under section 164
Cr.P.C on the same date before the same Court
of learned Judicial Magistrate-II/Ilaqa Qazi
Buner. These statements reveal that after full
satisfaction the Petitioner Saif-ur-Rahman and
the accused/Respondent Wali-ur-Rahman have
been charged to have hatched the conspiracy
while sharing their common intention are said to
have committed 'Qatl-i-Amd' of the deceased

Dost Muhammad Khan, Advocate.

8. Although the Investigation Officer
in order to link in chain the prosecution
evidence even at such belated time after more
than one year has wisely tried to connect the
Petitioner (Saif-ur-Rahman) with the
commission of an offence. The crime empties

were marked with 30 bore pistol and being
Nawab

found similar yet in the wake neither the
Petitioner Saif-ur-Rahman nor the
accused/Respondent Wali-ur-Rahman are
named in the First Information Report even in
the site plan being only shown of their presence
without holding fire arms to commit Qatl-i-Amd
of the deceased Dost Muhammad Khan. Thus, at
this stage being case of further inquiry the
accused/Petitioner Saif-ur-Rahman is entitled to
the concession of bail subject to his furnishing
bail bonds in the sum of Rs. 200,000/- ( Rupees
two lacs) with two sureties each in the like
amount to the satisfaction of learned trial Court,
who shall ensure that the sureties are local,

reliable and men of means.

9. Likely the order dated 03.01.2017
favouring the grant of bail in favour of the
accused/Respondent Wali-ur-Rahman is in the
best interest of justice and the said so called order
is neither fanciful, arbitrary or even perverse, so,
both the connected cancellation petitions filed by
the complainant Sahib Roz Khan and the State

respectively are also answered in negative. Above
Nawab

all, principles for cancellation of bail are quite
different from grant thereof. Once bail is granted
by a competent Court of law, then it can be
recalled only if it is shown that either the bail
granting order was perverse or was in utter
disregard to the case evidence which is not the

case here.

These are the reasons of my short

order of even date.

Announced

Dt: 11.04.2017 JUDGE
