JUDGMENT SHEET

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH CO
PESHAWAR
(Judicial Department)

Cr.M B.A, No. 2753-P/2017
Jumma Khan & J another V/S The State
&

Cr.M B.A. No. 2893-P/2017
Zeeshan V/S The State

CONSOLIDATED JUDGMENT
Date of hearing: 04.01.2018

Petitioners:- (Jumma Khan, Jamal Khan and

Zeeshan) by M/S Fagir Hussain & Muhammad

Adil, Advocates.

Respondents:- (The State & ] another) by Mr.

Arshad Ahmad, A.A.G.
MOHAMMAD IBRAHIM_ KHAN, J.- Jumma
Khan withal his companion Jamal Khan are
jointly looking for their post arrest bail being
entangled in case FIR No. 1114 dated
04.09.2016 charged under sections 382,412
PPC registered at Police Station Bhana Mari
reo Peshawar. Their earlier petition for the similar
relief was declined by the Court of learned

Additional Sessions Judge-XV Peshawar vide

his order dated 05.12.2017,

Nawad (S.B.) Hon'ble Mr, Justice Mohammad Ibrahim Khan

wns
2. There is another application for the
grant of post arrest bail of accused/Petitioner
Zeeshan who has also been arrested in this case
the particulars whereof are mentioned as above.
His petition for the ‘identical relief was
conjointly dismissed by the said learned Court
on even date. The reasons being advanced for
dismissal of the bail petitions of all the above
three accused are that “they have been charged
for_commission of heinous offence. There is
recovery of the snatched amount effected from
the Kota Rehaishi_of the accused/Petitioners on
their pointation. They have been duly identified
by the complainant in the identification parade
conducted at Central Jail Peshawar by the Area
Judicial Magistrate. Therefore, prima facie
connected with the commission of heinous

offence, thus_their_prayer for the liberty was

declined.”

3. According to the report,
Muhammad Ishfaq the complainant was present
in his’ shop at around 11:35 hours on 04.9.2016,

in the meanwhile two persons entered in his

Nawab (3.B) Hon'ble Mr, Jostice Mohammed Torebim Khas

\

an

3
shop. Both of them pointed their respective
pistols towards him. At the same time they
broke the drawer and taken out Rs. 15 lacs out
of it. They also snatched the mobile Galaxy-I
which was in the use of the complainant bearing
its sim # 03456884861. After commission of
this offence they vamoosed from the venue of
crime through motorcycle. The complainant
then came out of his shop raised rallying cry. At
the base of this complaint, the complainant
stated that three persons were slipped away after
commission of the offence instead of two
persons whose names were not mentioned but if
brought before him he would be able to identify

them.

4. It was on 15.10.2016 when the
complainant Muhammad Ishfaq recorded his
statement under section 164 Cr.P.C that after his
<-full satisfaction he named Noroz, Gulzar and
Qaiser to be those persons who had entered in
his shop and had snatched Rs. 15 lacs from him
along with the mobile Galaxy-II. Copy of the

order dated 25.10.2016 passed by the learned

Nawab (5.8) Hoa'ble Mr. Justlee Mohanima Ibrabim Khan Ee

eo

4
Judicial Magistrate IV Peshawar is available on
the record whereby all the three persons named
as above by the complainant in his statement

recorded u/s 164 Cr.P.C were granted bail.

5. Next off, these accused/Petitioners
Jumma Khan, Jamal Khan and Zeeshan were
arrested on one and the same date i.e.
07.11.2017. Later their identification parade
was conducted and accordingly the complainant
of this case duly identified them correctly
before the learned Judicial Magistrate IX
Peshawar and some recoveries have also been
effected as stated to be the snatched amount but

of very scrimpy amount. .

6. Having heard arguments of learned
counsel for these accused/Petitioners and

learned A.A.G appearing on behalf of the State,

record with their valuable assistance ‘one
pod 8

through. While as per report dated 28.12.2017
of the learned Deputy Registrar (Judicial) of this
Court, the complainant/Respondent No. 2

Muhammad Ishfaq despite personal service did

Nawab (S.B.) Hoo'bie Mr. Justice Mohammad Ibrahim Khan

5
not appear before him and even today he is not
before the Court. Therefore this being bail
matter cannot be kept pending for an indefinite
period as liberty of the accused/Petitioners is at
stake, so was taken up for hearing even in

absence of the complainant.

7. Learned counsel for the

accused/Petitioners Jumma Khan and Jamal

Khan referred to 2017 YLR Note 5 (Peshawar
DI. Bench) “Abdul Waheed V/S The State and

another”. Likewise, learned counsel for the

accused/Petitioner Zeeshan relied upon 2017

P_CrLJ Note 14 (Peshawar) “Nazir Ahmad

V/S_The State and another”, 2015 PCrLI

1538 (Peshawar) “Yaqoob Khan V/S The

State”, 1997 SCMR 412 “ Muhammad Rafique

VIS __The__State”and 1995 SCMR 127
“Muhammad Ahmad and 3 others V/S The
pod.

‘eo State and another” and thereby prayed for the

grant of bail in favour of each of the
accused/Petitioner. Inversely, learned A.A.G
appearing on behalf of the State vehemently

opposed the grant of bail as _ these

Nawab (S.B.) Hon'ble Mr, Sustice Mohammad Ibrahim Khan

Ze

eo

6 .
accused/Petitioners “have been involved in
snatching of huge amount of Rs. 15 lacs along

with Galaxy-II mobile from the complainant.

8. The version of complainant
Muhammad Ishfaq by itself is doubtful that at
the time when the amount of Rs. 15 lacs along
with mobile were snatched from ‘him two
persons had entered in his shop, while he has
charged three persons and none by name. Later
in his statement recorded ws 164 Cr.P.C on
15.10.2016 he has named others/persons by the
names of Noroz, Gulzar and Qaiser who have
already been released on bail. Amongst these
accused/Petitioners, Petitioner Jumma Khan is
an Afghan National, he has been arrested on the
basis of asservations within the meaning of
Section 14 (ii) Foreign Act 1946 at Police
' io, Station Cantt District Kohat in case FIR No.
584 dated 05.11.2017. Therefore when the
complainant has charged the other three persons
after his satisfaction then these Petitioners might
have been charged at the instance of police

when their arrest was effected afterwards the

Nawab (5.B.) Hlen'bie Mr. Justice Mohammad Ibrabim KBan

Pe

TED

MOOR uct

15 FEB 2016
7.
‘commission of this occurrence and may be they
have been typified before the complainant with
the connivance of the police. This case is
shrouded in mystery as to who amongst these —
Petitioners or the persons already named in the
Statement under section 164 -Cr.P.C of the
complainant are amongst those persons who had
entered in the shop and snatched the amount of
Rs. 15 lacs as well as the mobile phone owned
by the complainant. Even if there exist a doubt
at bail stage the Court can take notice of it and
grant bail to the Petitioners whose presence has
been made doubtful at the venue of crime by

none else but the complainant himself. Reliance

is placed on PLD 1996 Supreme Court 24] "Syed
Amanullah Shah V/S The State and another. The

- relevant citation (c) of the ibid judgment speaks

yo of:-

" Whenever reasonable doubt arises
with regard to the participation of an
accused person in the crime or about
the truth or probability of the
prosecution case and the evidence
proposed to be produced in support
of the charge, the accused should

Nawab (S.B.) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Meharmmed Ibrahint Khan,

8

not be deprived of benefit of bail and
in such a@ situation it would be better
to keep him on bail than in the jail
during the trial."

In search of same. analogy reliance
can further be placed on 2016 SCMR 18 "Zaigham

Ashraf V/S The State and others", wherein it has:

been held:-

"Care and caution to be exercised by
court when granting/refusing bail to
an accused, To curtail the liberty of a
person was a serious step in law,
therefore, the judges should apply
judicial mind with deep thought for
reaching at a fair and proper
conclusion albeit tentatively. Such
exercise should not be carried out in
vacuum or in a flimsy and casual
manner as that would defeat the ends
of justice because if the accused
charged, was ultimately acquitted at
the trial then no " reparation or
compensation could be awarded to
him for the long incarceration, as the
provisions of Criminal Procedure
mad Code and the scheme of law on the
subject did not provide for such
arrangements to repair the loss,
caused to an accused person, detained:
in jail without just cause and
reasonable grounds. Extraordinary

care and caution should, thus, be

Nawab (S.B.) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Mohammad Ibrahim Khas

45 FE 2a

EE
Mee

9

exercised by the judges in the course
of granting or refusing to grant bail to
an accused person, charged for
offence(s), punishable with capital
punishment.”

9. In view of the above observations
which are purely tentative in nature, on
acceptance of both these petitions all the three
accused/Petitioners are admitted to bail subject
to furnishing bail bonds in the sum of Rs.
200,000/- (Rupees two lacs) with two sureties
each in the like amount to the satisfaction of
learned Illaqa Judicial Magistrate/Duty
Magistrate, who shall ensure that the sureties

are local, reliable and men of means.

10. These are the reasons of my short

orders of even date.

Announc oo
Dt: 04.01.2018 JUDGE
CERTIFIED ta

Peshawar He
ethorisoct
he Qanun-es

Nawab (5.0) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Moharamad Ibvebin Kbae
