JUDGMENT SHEET
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT PESHAWAR
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT

Cr.Misc./BA. No. 2218-P/2017.
Zaib Khan vs, State
JUDGMENT
Date ofhearing: 20.10.2017.
Petitioner: (Zaib Khan) by Mr. Yousaf Ali, advocate.

State by Mr.Moinuddin Humayun, AAG.

OK

SHAKEEL AHMAD, J. - Through the instant criminal

Misc.application, the accused/petitioner Zaib Khan s/o Farooq
Khan seeks post arrest in crime report No.591 dated
14.9.2017, registered under section 9(c) of the Control of
Narcotic Substances Act, 1997 of Police Station, Rustam
District Mardan.

2. The prosecution case as set forth in the crime
report are that on 14.9.2017, complainant Dilawar Khan SI
reported that during search and strike operation (headed by
DSP Rural) he was present in the locality, he received
information that the petitioner is busy in selling of narcotics.
He alongwith other police officials went to the spot,
_overpowered the accused and recovered 3020 grams charas
from his immediate possession. Five grams sample was.
separated from the total lot for chemical examination. The

accused/petitioner was arrested on the spot. Vide order dated
2

25.9.2017, the petitioner was declined bail by the learned
Additional Sessions Judge-II, Mardan, hence this petition.

3. The learned counsel for the petitioner argued
that on the face of it, the prosecution case is false and
concocted one. He next argued that nothing incriminating
article was recovered from possession of the
accused/petitioner. He further argued that the recovery was
shown from a public place, but, no private witness was
associated to attest the recovery of contraband. He further
elaborated that while deciding the bail application under the
Control of Narcotic Substances Act, 1997, the nature and
quality of contraband and ultimate punishment which is likely
to be imposed is to be kept in mind He lastly argued that
investigation in the instant case is complete and the petitioner
is no more required for the purpose of investigation, therefore,
he is entitled to be released on bail. In support of his
contention, he placed reliance on 2012 SCMR-573, 2016
P.Cr.L.J-730 and 2017 MLD 288.

4, As against that the learned AAG representing
the State argued that the petitioner was caught red handed and
charas weighing 3020 grams were recovered from his
personal possession. The FSL report reveals that the
recovered item was charas. He lastly argued that the offence
with which the petitioner is charged falls within the
prohibition contained in section 497 Cr.P.C, therefore, the

petitioner is not entitled for bail.
3

5. I have heard arguments of the learned counsel
for the petitioner and AAG representing the State and perused
the record with their able assistance.
6. The maximum sentences provided by _ the
Control of Narcotic Substances Act, 1997 for different
quantities of the recovered contraband Narcotic Substances
are as under:-
Section 9 (a): (if the recovered quantity is
100 grams or less) Imprisonment upto 2
years or fine or both.
Section 9 (b): (if the recovered quantity

exceeds 100 grams but does not exceed 1
kilogram) Imprisonment upto 7 years and

ine.

Section 9 (c): (if the recovered quantity
exceeds I kilogram).

Death or imprisonment for life or

imprisonment upto 14 years and fine upto

one million Rupees.

If the recovered quantity exceeds 10

kilograms then the sentence is not to be less

than imprisonment for life.
7. A plan reading of class (a), (b) and (c) of
section 9 of the CNS Act, 1997 reveals that the sentences
provided by for the Control of Narcotic Substances Act, 1997
are prescribed with reference to quantity of the recovered
contraband Narcotic Substances and not with reference to the
kind or nature of the recovered contraband narcotic substance.
8. Perusal of record reveals that charas weighing

3020 grams were recovered from personal possession of the

petitioner and the FSL report was received in positive. The
case of the petitioner squarely falls in clause (c) of section 9
of Control of Narcotic Substances Act, 1997. The maximum
sentence provided by section 9(c) of Control of Narcotic
Substances Act, 1997 imprisonment which may extend to 14
years and fine upto one million rupees.

9. Section 51 of Control of Narcotic Substances
Act, 1997 deals with restriction for grant of bail in respect of
certain offences, it is divided into two parts, under part one,
accused whether male or female is not entitled to be released
on bail, if he or she is involved in an offence punishable with
death, provision of section 496 and 497 Cr.P.C_ has
specifically been excluded under this part, under second part
accused male or female involved in an offence which is
punishable less than death, is not normally required to be
released on bail unless the court is of opinion that it is a fit
case for grant of bail subject to condition of furnishing
security of substantial amount under this part application of
section 496 & 497 Cr.P.C. have not been excluded.

10. Coming to the contention of the learned counsel
for the petitioner that no witness from public was associated
though the alleged recovery was effected from public place.
‘The contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is
based on misconception. Section 25 of the Control of Narcotic
Substances Act, 1997 has excluded applicability of section
103 Cr.P.C. In this respect, reliance can be placed on PLD

2009 Quetta-5 and 2005 P.Cr.L.J 1558.
6

/—

2:3)x|1

11. The case law cited by the learned counsel for
the petitioner are out of context. Categorization of sentence or
any guess work or speculative exercise is prohibited at bail
stage in such crimes. In this respect, reference can well be
made on the case “Secha Gul vs. The State (2015 SCMR-
1077), wherein it was held as under:-
“Neither categorization of sentencing nor
any guess work or speculative exercise
could be undertaken by court at bail stage
to enlarge an accused on bail in such
crimes---Such categorization amounts to
pre-empting the mind of Trial Court,
controlling its powers in the matter of
sentencing accused and determining
quantum of sentence upon his conviction.
12. The investigation in the instant case is complete
and trial is likely to commence. The tentative assessment of
evidence available on record leads me to the conclusion that
prima facie the accused/petitioner is conriected with the
alleged crime and it is not a fit case for grant of bail.
13. For the foregoing reasons, the petitioner is not

entitled to the concession of bail. The petition in hand being

devoid of force is dismissed.

JUDGE

Announced.
Dated: 20.10.2017.

-T.Shah, PS Hon'ble Mr, Justice Shakeel Ahmad
