]

JUDGMENT SHEET
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
MINGORA BENCH (DAR-UL-QAZA), SWAT
(Judicial Department)

Cr.M B.C.A No. 110-M/2021.
Mst. Reema Bibi............s++ssseseseeese( Petitioner)
vs

Muhammad Sohail and others.....(Respondents)

Present: Mr. Aurangzeb Khan, Advocate for the
petitioner.

Mr. Fazal Karim, Advocate for the
respondents No.1 & 2/accused.

Mr. Saeed Ahmad, Asst:A.G for the
State.

Date of hearing: 23.11.2022
JUDGMENT

Dr. Khurshid Iqbal, J.-

L Through the instant petition,
Mst. Reema Bibi (“the petitioner”) wife of Khushid
Ali, a resident of Najeeb Abad, Danduno Qilla,
Rahimabad, Mingora, District Swat, seeks
cancellation of bail, granted to the respondents/
accused, namely, Sohail Khan and Chaman Khan,
by the learned Additional Sessions Judge/Izafi Zila

Qazi-II, Swat, vide his order passed on 24.11.2021.

2. The petitioner registered a criminal
case bearing FIR No.1521 on 14.11.2021 against
the respondent/accused Muhammad Sohail Khan
and Chaman Khan and two others u/ss.324/34/

337-F(v)/337-A(iiiV/336, PPC in PS Rahimabad.

Bakht Sher Ali/Steno (S.B.) Hon’ble Mr. Justice Dr. Khurshid Iqbal

2
3. Facts of the case shortly are that

on 14.11.2021, the petitioner/complainant in
injured condition reported the occurrence to the
local police and stated in her report that for the last
25/30 days, there was a matrimonial dispute
between her brother, namely, Rustam Khan with
his wife Mst. Asma Gul. On the eventful day, the
respondents/accused alongwith their co-accused
Mst. Neghat Bibi wife of Salim Khan and
Mst. Asma Gul wife of Rustam Khan, residents of
Gulkada No.2, Saidu Sharif, came to her house and
ranged the bell of the door of her house. When she
opened the outer door, she saw all the four accused
standing. All of a sudden, the respondent No.1/
accused Muhammad Sohail Khan, struck on her
mouth with some object that injured her teeth.
Similarly, the respondent No.2/accused Chaman
Khan fired at her with his pistol as a result of the

firing, she got injured on her left arm.

4, I have heard arguments of learned
counsel for the parties as well as the learned
Assistant Advocate General, for the State and

perused the record.

5. Needless to say, the grounds for

cancellation of bail are altogether different from the

Bakht Sher Ali/Steno {S.B.) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Dr. Khurshid Iqbal
3

grounds for the grant of bail in a criminal case. In

“Abdul Rashid Khan v. Zahoor Ahmad Malik &

others” reported as PLD 2011 SC 2010 (Supreme
Court of Pakistan), the august Supreme Court of

Pakistan, has observed that once bail has been
granted on merits by a competent Court, its
cancellation requires strong and exceptionable

circumstances. In the case of “Samiullah_and

another _v. Laig Zada_& another”, reported as
2020 SCMR 1115 (Supreme Court of Pakistan),

it has been held that the following grounds may
ordinarily be taken into consideration for a plea of
bail cancellation: -

(i) The bail granting order was patently illegal,
erroneous, factually incorrect and had resulted in
miscarriage of justice;

(ii) The accused had misused the concession of bail
in any manner;

(iii) The accused had tried to hamper prosecution
evidence by persuading/ pressurizing prosecution
witnesses.

(tv) There was likelihood of abscondment of the
accused beyond the jurisdiction of court;

(v) The accused had attempted to interfere with the
smooth course of investigation;

(vi) The accused misused his liberty while indulging
into a similar offence; and

(vii) Some fresh facts and material had been collecting
during the course of investigation establishing
guilt of the accused.

Reference may also be made to the

case “Muhammad Saifullah Cheema_y. Umer

Bakht Sher Ali/Steno (S.B.) Hon’ble Mr. Justice Dr. Khurshid Iqbal
S

4
Hayat_and 2 others”, reported as 2022 PCr.LJ

1327 (Lahore), in which as many as five grounds,

similar to the above, have been delineated.

6. Learned counsel for the petitioner
argued at length that in the circumstances of the
present case, ground No.(i) is attracted. He
vehemently stressed on two aspects. Firstly, that
the learned trial judge has ignored the fact as the
respondents have been directly charged for
attempted murder and hurts, including I/#laf-i-
Salahiyyat-i-udw and the punishments provided for
the offences u/ss. 324, 336, 337-A(ili), PPC, being
hit by the prohibitory clause of section 497, Cr.P.C.
Secondly, he emphasized that a certain FIR
No.1122 dated 07.11.2022, on the basis of which
bail was granted, was withdrawn by the

prosecution.

7. Be that as it may, during the
arguments it was admitted by learned counsel for
the petitioner that challan has been submitted and
the trial commenced before the learned trial Court.
In the case of Samiullah supra, the august apex
Court has held that:

“6. Needless to say that considerations for grant of
bail and those for its cancellation are entirely
difference. Ordinarily, the grounds which are taken
into consideration for cancellation of bail are:-

Bakht Sher Ali/Steno (S.B.) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Dr. Khurshid Iqbal
5

() That the applicant has misused the
concession of bail and is causing fear and
alarm to the complainant and the prosecution
witnesses;

(ii) That there is likelihood of witnesses being
won over and their evidence being tampered
with;

(iii) That there is likelihood of repetition of the
commission of the crime which the accused
had allegedly committed;

(iv) That the accused was likely to abscond; and

(v) That the order granting the bail was
arbitrary, capricious and against the evidence
with the prosecution.

None of the above mentioned grounds is
available to the complainant/petitioner calling for
cancellation of bail granted to respondents Nos.1
and 2, It is nowhere mentioned in the petition that
respondents Nos.1 and 2 have misused the bail.
Once the bail has been granted on merits by the
Court of competent jurisdiction, very strong and
exceptional circumstances are required to cancel
the same, which are not available to the petition in

this case.
7. saueeeeuvecccnesseeecenonscoenecreeesenessuseseaneeaes
8. Since, learned counsel for the petitioner has

not been able to point out any solid reason for
cancellation of bail, therefore, this petition having
no merits, is dismissed.”

Similarly, in the case of “Muhammad

Akram v, Zahid Iqbal & others”, reported in 2008
SCMR_1715 (Supreme Court of Pakistan), the

august Supreme Court has observed that once trial
has commenced, interference with the bail granted
would be avoided by the Higher Courts. Although
the cited case pertained to murder, the principle the
Hon’ble Court laid down is the same that after
commencement of trial, cancellation of bail would

not be desirable. The Hon’ble Court has observed

Bakht Sher Ali/Steno {S.B.) Hon’ble Mr. Justice Dr. Khurshid Iqbal
ope wR

| ope /8

6

that interference with the bail would help avoid
making remarks that may have an impact on the
merits of the case. Reliance is also placed on
“Rehmatullah v. the State and another” reported
as 2011 SCMR 1332 (Supreme Court of Pakistan),
“Aurang Zeb v. Muhammad Yaqoob & 03 others”
reported as 2022 PCr.LJ 1047 (High Court of
AJ&K) and 2022 PCr.LJ 1327 (Lahore).

8. In view of the above, the instant bail
cancellation application is found to be meritless,

therefore, is hereby dismissed.

Announced
Dt: 23.11.2022

Bakht Sher Ali/Steno {S.B.) Hon’ble Mr. Justice Dr. Khurshid Iqbal
