JUDGMENT SHEET

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
PESHAWAR
(Judicial Department)

Cr.A. No.135-P/2015
Date of hearing: 09/07/2015

Appellant (s) : Ayaz

Respondent (s) : State

JUDGMENT

ASSADULLAH KHAN CHAMMKANT, J.-

At a trial held by learned Anti Terrorism Court,

Mardan, appellants Ayaz and Khurshid

Nauman alias Hasnain, having been found

guilty vide judgment dated 28.02.2015, have

been convicted and sentenced under section 15

of the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Arms Act, 2013 to

undergo 07 years R.I. and to pay a fine of

Rs.3000/- or in default thereof to undergo 01

month S.J. further, each. Similarly, under

section 7 (i) of the Anti Terrorism Act, each of

them has been convicted and sentenced to

undergo 07 years R.I. and to pay a fine of

Rs.10,000/- or in default thereof to undergo 03

months S.I. each. Besides, under section

5 Explosive Substance Act, 1908 read with S.7

(ff) ATA, appellant Khurshid Nauman has been

further convicted and sentence to undergo 14

years R.I. with forfeiture of his property to the

State. The sentences have been directed to run

concurrently. Benefit of S.382-B Cr.P.C. has

been extended to the appellants-convicts.

2. Against their conviction and sentences,

convict Ayaz has filed the instant appeal, and

Cr.A. Nof.150-P/2015 by convict Khurshid

Nauman, while, the State seeking enhancement

of sentences of the convicts, has preferred Cr.A.

No.190-P/2015. Since, all the three appeals are

the outcome of one and the same judgment of

the learned Trial Court dated 28.02.2015,

*M.Siraj Afridi PS. D

therefore, this common judgment shall govern

all of them.

3. On 31.03.2014, on receipt of spy

information qua presences of appellants Ayaz

and Khurshid Nauman, in the Baithak of the

former, wanted in case FIR No.45 dated

24.01.2014 under sections 302/353/34 PPC and

S.7 ATA Police Station Kalu Khan, FIR

No.229 dated 29.06.2013 under sections

324/427 PPC and 7 ATA Police Station Kalu

Khan and FIR No.460 dated 17.11.2013 under

sections 302/353/404/436/427 PPC and S.7

ATA Police Station Parmoli, Haji Muhamamd

Khan SHO Police Station Parmoli District

Swabi, alongwith other police officials, under

the supervisions of DSP’s Circle Lahore and

Razar, conducted raid on the Baithak of

appellant Ayaz. Both of them on seeing the

raiding party, tried to flee away, but were

*M.Siraj Afridi PS. D

nabbed on the spot. On personal search of

appellant Khurshid Nauman, a hand grenade

alongwith 9 MM bore pistol containing 5 live

rounds of the same bore and from appellant

Ayaz 30 bore pistol alongwith fixed charger

and 15 live rounds of the same bore were

recovered. Haji Muhammad Khan SHO

formally arrested the appellants and took into

possession the recovered arms and

ammunitions vide recovery memo. He drafted

murasila Exh.PA./1 and sent the same to Police

Station on the basis of which FIR Exh.PA

No.95 dated 31.03.2014 was registered against

the appellants under section 5 Explosive

Substances Act, Sections 13 and 15 Khyber

Pakhtunkhwa Arms Act, 2013, 8.7 ATA and

S.15 PPO, in Police Station Parmoli District

Swabi.

4. Said Jameel Khan Inspector

(PW.6), reached the spot and prepared site plan

Exh.PB on the pointation of complainant SHO,

recorded statements of the PWs under section

161 Cr.P.C., examined the arms = and

ammunitions through Armuror and BDS and

submitted application for destruction of the

hand grenade through BDS. He sealed the

recovered arms and ammunitions and took the

same into possession vide recovery memo

Exh.PW.3/1, recorded statements of the PWs

under section 161 Cr.P.C. and placed on file

previous FIRs registered against the appellants.

After completion of investigation, he handed

over case file to the SHO, who submitted

challan against the appellants before the learned

Trial Court.

5. On receipt of challan by the

learned Trial Court, appellants were summoned

*M.Siraj Afridi PS. D

and formally charge sheeted, to which they

pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. To prove

its case prosecution examined seven witnesses.

After closure of the prosecution evidence,

statements of the appellants were recorded

under section 342 Cr.P.C. wherein they denied

the prosecutions allegations and professed their

innocence. Appellant Ayaz declined to be

examined on oath or to produce evidence in

defence. However, appellant Khurshid Nauman

appeared as his own witness under section 340

(2) Cr.P.C. but did not opt to produce evidence

in defence.

6. While appearing as his own

witness under section 340 (2) Cr.P.C. Khurshid

Nauman deposed as under:-

“My name is Khurshid Ali son of
Umbaras Khan and am residing in Swabi

Khas. I am educated upto Masters and

am serving in education department as

Theology Teacher in GMS Seen Khel

Maneri District Swabi. I produced

certified extracts of my academic

qualification as Exh.D.3 consisting of 14

sheets in which my name is mentioned as

Khurshid Ali. I am also Pesh Imam for

Masjid Nimra Swabi. On 21.02.2014, the

local police arrested me after Maghrib

prayer from near the Mosque and

covered my face and took me to the PS.

Then on 31.03.2014, they formally showed

my arrest and during this period they

subjected me to sever torture and kept me

in various police Stations and compelled

me to confess my guilt. I am innocent and

the local police on some ill information

arrested and implicated me in the present

case. I have never confessed my guilt

before any court of law or police nor any

incriminating recovery was effected from

me and the one attributed to me is the
result of plantation”.

7. On conclusion of trial, the learned

Trial Court, after hearing both the sides

convicted and sentenced the appellants as

mentioned above, hence, this appeal.

8. Learned counsel for the appellants

argued that prosecution case is a cock and bull

story having no nexus with the reality; that the

two appellants have been shown arrested in the

Baithak of appellant Ayaz, situated in Asota

Sharif Swabi, but arrest card of appellant

Khurshid Nauman squarely negates the story of

arrest of the appellant in the Baithak of Ayaz,

where his arrest has been shown from his own

baithak situated in Swabi Khas i.e. at a distance

of 27 to 30 Kilometers from the Baithak of

appellant Ayaz; that the alleged recovered arms

and ammunitions had not been sealed on the

spot, which create serious doubt about its

recovery; that both the appellants being

innocent have already been acquitted in all the

cases mentioned in the FIR in which they were

allegedly wanted; that alleged hand grenade has

not been produced before the court nor any

destruction certificate in respect thereof has

been brought on record nor any sanction for

prosecution as required under section 7 of the

Explosive Substance Act, has been obtained

therefore entire proceedings would be void and

without jurisdiction; that the defence plea of

appellant Khurshid Nauman in his statement

under section 340 (2) Cr.P.C. has been proved;

that the prosecution evidence being suffering

from material contradictions and discrepancies

has wrongly believed and relied upon by the

learned Trial Court, therefore, the impugned

judgment is liable to be reversed.

10

9. Conversely, learned AAG

contended that appellants have been arrested

red handed and recovery of the arms and

ammunitions have been effected from their

direct possession, who were already involved in

so many criminal cases pertaining to terrorism;

that police officials had no ill will or enmity to

falsely implicate them; that there is clerical

mistake in the arrest card of Khurshid appellant,

which would not damage the entire prosecution

case; that under Sub-section (8b) of Section 19

of the Anti Terrorism Act, 1997, if sanction

within the meaning of S.7 of the Explosive

Substance Act, has not been received within

thirty day, the Trial Court shall proceed with

the trial; that the same exercise has been

adopted by the learned Trial Court, therefore,

non-availability of sanction for prosecution,

would not damage the prosecution case, he

11

added. He while supporting the impugned

judgment sought dismissal of the appeal.

10. We have given our anxious

consideration to the respective arguments

advance from both the sides and perused the

record.

11. It appears from the record that a

recovery of a hand grenade and 9 MM bore

pistol loaded with five rounds has been shown

from personal possession of appellant Khurshid

Nauman, while a 30 bore pistol alongwith fixed

charger containing 15 live rounds of the same

bore, from possession of appellant Ayaz. Both

the appellants have been shown arrested in the

Baithak of appellant Ayaz in a raid, as manifest

from the First Information Report. The Baithak

of appellant Ayaz is situated in Asota Swabi.

Haji Muhammad Khan complainant SHO while

appearing as PW.1 reiterated the same story of

12

arrest of the appellants in the Baithak of Ayaz

and recovery from their personal possession,

but Exh.D.1 i.e. arrest card of appellant

Khurshid Nauman, shows that he had been

arrested on 31.03.2014, from his own Baithak

situated in Sawabi Khas, at a distance of 27/30

Kilometers from the Baithak of appellant Ayaz.

We are confronted with two versions qua arrest

of appellant Khurshid Nauman, which one is

correct, would be best known to the

complainant/SHO, however, it create serious

doubt which goes to the very roots of the

prosecution case.

12. Haroon Khan SHO PW.2, who

acted as a marginal witness to recovery memo

Exh.PW.1/1 deposed that the case property was

not sealed by the complainant SHO in his

presence on the spot. Awal Sher Khan HC

while appearing as PW.3 deposed that he stood

13

as a marginal witness to recovery memo

Exh.PW.3/1, vide which in his presence the I.O.

took into possession a hand grenade, a 9 MM

bore pistol, containing 5 live rounds, recovered

from accused Khurshid Nauman, and 30 bore

pistol alongwith 15 live rounds, recovered from

appellant Ayaz; that the same were sealed into

parcel by affixing 3 seals in the name of SJ; that

the above recovery had not been effected in his

presence from the appellants, rather the arms

and ammunitions were produced by Chief

Investigating Officer (C.I.O.), and he himself

sealed the same into parcel and these were not

sealed at the time of its production before the

CIO; that recovery memo was prepared on the

following day of the occurrence and the parcels

were prepared in the Police Station and sealed

there and then. This aspect of the case creates

serious doubts about the alleged recovery.

14

13. Besides, sanction for prosecution

has not been obtained in respect of charge

under 5 Explosive Substance Act against

appellant Khursheed Nauman, which was

mandatory under section 7 of the Explosive

Substance Act, 1908. In case titled, “Said

Muhammad Vs the State” (2009 P Cr L J

Peshawar 604), this Court while declaring the

trial in violation of S.7 of Explosive Substance

Act, 1908, acquitted the accused in the

circumstances. Section 7 of the Act ibid is

unambiguous, and by word “shall” compliance

thereof has been made mandatory. For

convenience we reproduce the same below:-

“S.7 Restriction on trial of offences:

No court shall proceed to the trial

of any peson for an offence against

this Act except with the consent of

the Provincial Government”.

15

Thus word “Shall” used in section 7 of the

Explosive Substances Act, leaves no room for

any departure therefrom. Though sub-section

(8b) of Section 19 of the Anti Terrorism Act,

provides way for the Trial Court to proceed

with the trial in absence of any such sanction if

not received within the period specified therein,

but from the language of sub-section (8b) of

Section 19 ATA, it is very much evident that

the prosecution would apply for such sanction,

and if the same is not received within thirty

days of submission of challan, it shall be

deemed to have been given or accorded and the

court shall proceed with the trial of the case.

For convenience we deem it appropriate to

reproduce sub-section (8b) of Section 19 of the

ATA, 1997:-

“Notwithstanding anything contained in

section 7 of the Explosive Substance Act,

16

1908 (VI of 1908) or any other law for the
time being in force, if the consent or
sanction of the appropriate authority,
where required, is not received within
thirty days of submission of challan in the
Court, the same shall be deemed to have
been given or accorded and the Court shall
proceed with the Trial of the case”.

Had there been no need or any consent or

sanction of the appropriate authority under sub-

section (8b) of Section 19 of the ATA, the

Legislature in its wisdom would not have

mentioned about receipt of consent or sanction

within certain specified period, rather would

have mentioned that without any consent or

sanction the Trial Court could proceed with the

trial. When there is mention of receipt of

consent or sanction within thirty days, it

impliedly indicates to sending and seeking

consent or sanction. In the instant case, the

17

prosecution has not sought consent or sanction

for prosecution from the competent authority,

much less receipt of the same within thirty days.

Had the prosecution sought consent or sanction,

and the same had not been received within the

specified period, then in such circumstances, the

situation would have been different and the

provisions of sub-section (8b) of Section 19 of

the ATA, would cater to such situation. So on

this score too appellant Khurshid Nauman is

entitled to acquittal straightaway under section 5

Explosive Substance Act.

14. For what has been discussed above,

prosecution has miserably failed to bring home

the guilt of the appellants through cogent and

confidence inspiring evidence beyond shadow of

reasonable doubt, therefore, we do not deem it

appropriate to dilate upon the defence plea of

appellant Khurshid Nauman, which otherwise,

18

has been substantiated by him in his statement

under section 340 (2) Cr.P.C. There are so many

circumstances in the prosecution case which

create serious doubt about the arrest of the

appellants and recovery from their possession.

Consequently, we while allowing both the

appeals of the appellants-convicts and extending

benefit of doubt to the appellants, hereby acquit

them of the charge leveled against them. They

be set at liberty forthwith, if not required in any

other case. On acquittal of the convicts Cr.A.

No.190-P/2015, titled, “The State Vs Ayaz etc”

having become infructuous, stands dismissed.

15. These are reasons of our short order

of even date.

16. The Additional Registrar (Judicial)

of this Court is directed to send copy of this

judgment to the Additional Inspector General

(Investigation) and the Director General

19

Prosecution, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Peshawar

for future guidance about sanction for

prosecution in cases registered under the

provisions of Explosive Substances Act, with

intimation to this Court.

Announced.
01.07.2015

JUDGE

JUDGE

*M.Siraj Afridi PS. D

20
*M.Siraj Afridi PS. D

21
