JUDGMENT SHEET
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,

D.LKHAN BENCH
(Judicial Department)

Cr.MBA.No,362-D/2019

Abdul Majid
Versus

The State and another

JUDGMENT
For petitioner: Mr. Saif-ur-Rahman Khan Advocate.
For State: Ms. Nahid Akhtar Advocate.

For complainant: | Muhammad Mohsin Ali Advocate.

Date ofhearing: 18.12.2019.

kK

S.M. ATTIQUE SHAH, J.- Through this petition the

petitioner Abdul Majid has sought bail after arrest in case
FIR No.45 dated 21.02.2019 under Sections 419/420 PPC
registered at Police Station Paroa, D.I.Khan.
2. The brief facts of the case, as set forth in the
crime report, are that on 18.01.2018 complainant Haji
. Bandi Gul submitted an application to the local police for
registration of case against the petitioner. On the said
application, inquiry was conducted and resultantly the
ibid FIR was registered. It is averred in the application
that on 19.4.2017 the complainant handed over
Rs.6,50,000/- alongwith passport, CNIC and photographs
to the petitioner for the purpose of performing Hajj but
neither the petitioner sent him for the performance of Hajj

nor returned the above said amount to him. The
-2-
complainant approached the petitioner and demanded the
amount but at first he was making lame excuses and
thereafter disappeared. The complainant reported that the
petitioner committed fraud with him and deprived him
from the above said amount.

3. After his arrest, the petitioner submitted an
application for his release on bail which was allowed by
learned Judicial Magistrate, Paroa D.I.Khan vide order
dated 12.3.2019. Thereafter the complainant submitted an
application for cancellation of bail of the petitioner which
was allowed by learned Additional Sessions Judge-VI,
D.I.Khan vide order dated 08.5.2019, hence, this petition.
4. Arguments heard and record perused.

5. Perusal of the record reveals that the
petitioner is directly charged in the FIR by the
complainant. The petitioner obtained a huge amount of
Rs.6,50,000/- from the complainant for sacred journey of
Hajj but he failed to send him for the said purpose and
despite lapse of sufficient long time did not return the
amount to the complainant. The record suggests that the
petitioner is habitual offender and many cases of
dishonestly issuing cheques have been registered against
him. Though the punishment provided for the offence
does not come within the prohibitory clause of 497 Cr.PC
but it is not a rule of universal application.

6. The "deceptive behavior" of the petitioner

depriving the innocent and poor people from their life
a

\v

-3-
saving is a factor, which cannot be ignored lightly. The
offence is not only heinous but also an offence against
humanity and society, therefore, the petitioner does not
deserve any discretionary relief. In similar nature case
titled “Haji Shahid Hussain and others Vs. The State
and another” reported in 2017 SCMR_ 616, the apex
Court refused bail to the petitioners and held that:-
“This nature of frauds have become
so common that, every year, before
the Hajj Season commences,
innocent and rustic peoples are
looted by various so called agencies
including the unauthorized tour
operators, of which judicial notice
is required to be taken to curb the
increasing menace of frauds
practiced in religious and pious
matters, therefore, Courts are
required to treat these cases
differently and such frauds must be
brought to halt.”
7. Taking a tentative assessment of the
available record, there exists a prima facie case against
the petitioner, therefore, he is not entitled to the
concession of bail. Consequently, the instant petition
being without any merit is dismissed.
8. Needless to say that any observation made

in this order being tentative in nature should in no way

prejudice the proceedings before the learned trial Court.

Announced.
Dt: 18.12.2019. We
Imran/* GODGE

(S.B)
Hon’ble Mr. Justice $.M. Attique Shah
