JUDGMENT SHEET
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
PESHAWAR
(Judicial Department)

J.Cr.A.No.126-P of 2018 with Murder
Reference No.01 of 2018.

Date of hearing: 12.09.2019.

Mr.Daniyal Khan Chamkani, advocate for
appellant.

Mr.Arshad Ahmad Khan, AAG for State.

Mr.Khalid Mehmood, advocate for
complainant.

JUDGMENT

SAHIBZADA_ ASADULLAH, J.- This jail
criminal appeal is directed against the
judgment dated 20.01.2018 recorded by
learned Additional Sessions Judge-ll, Camp
Court Lahor, Swabi delivered in case FIR
No.26 dated 12.02.2014 u/s 302 PPC of
Police Station Tordher District Swabi,
whereby upon conviction, the appellant
has been sentenced to death and to pay
Rs.5,00,000/- as compensation to the legal
heirs of the deceased or in default whereof
to suffer imprisonment for six months.

2. As per prosecution version, on
42.02.2014, complainant Mst.Mumlikat wife
of Noor Rehman brought dead body of her

son Shafi-ur-Rehman with the help of
co-villagers to Police Station Tordher and
alleged that on the eventful day at the
relevant time, she along with her deceased
son Shafi-ur-Rehman and Tufail were
present in their house when in the meantime
Ghani-ur-Rehman, her brother-in-law, called
his son Shafi-ur-Rehman from outside upon
which her deceased son Shafi-ur-Rehman
went out where oral altercation started
between the two, upon which she came out
of her house and saw that Ghani-ur-Rehman
appellant has caught hold of her son from
his hand and was forcibly taking to the hujra
of Ismail where said Ghani-ur-Rehman
made firing at her son Shafi-ur-Rehman with
the intention to kill as result her son got hit
and died on the spot. Ghani-ur-Rehman
appellant after commission of the offence
decamped from the spot. Motive for the
crime is stated to be an altercation took
place 2/3 days prior to the present
occurrence between deceased
Shafi-ur-Rehman and  Ghani-ur-Rehman
appellant, hence the case was registered.

3. After completion of investigation,
challan was submitted in court, which

indicted the accused for commission of the
offence to which he pleaded not guilty and
claimed trial. Prosecution in order to
substantiate its case produced and
examined ten witnesses in ail, whereafter
statement of accused was recorded,
wherein, he professed his innocence. The
learned trial court, on conclusion of trial,
convicted and sentenced the appellant, as
mentioned above, whereagainst he has filed
the instant appeal.

4. The arguments of learned counsels
for the parties are heard and with their
valuable assistance the record was read
from cover to cover.

5. Yes, it is a case of single accused
having been charged for commission of the
murder of the deceased where, mother of
the deceased and uncle of the deceased are
shown as eyewitnesses, we further affirm
that accused charged is the uncle of the
deceased but this should not be the sole
basis for conviction and is not enough to get
satisfaction rather the prosecution will still
have to go a long way to prove its case
against the appellant to quench the thirst of
appreciation and judicial satisfaction of the

mind.
6. The prosecution story begins when
the complainant Mst.Mumlikat (PW-5)
reported the death of her son to the local
police at Police Station Tordher District
Swabi. The complainant shown herself and
her deceased son along with Tufail, her
second son, at home when at the knock of
the accused at her door, the deceased went
out, who was caught hold of by the accused
and dragged him to the Hujra of one Ismail,
which figures in the site plan. It is the
version of the complainant that she followed
them and at the same time she called
Shafi-ur-Rehman, the eye witness, who also
followed till they reached to the Hujra of
Ismail and when the accused took the
deceased dragging in front of the Hujra, the
accused caught one hand of the deceased
and fired, which led to his death. Shafiq-un-
Nabi was examined as PW-6, who too in his
court statement explained that he was
informed by the complainant at 07:45 AM
and started chasing the accused and
deceased and at last reached to the place of
occurrence at 08:00 AM. Both the witnesses

were taught conscious improvements and
when the two are read together they run
apart. The complainant says that when she
reached near the place of occurrence, the
accused/appellant fired at the deceased and
the deceased was still in his clutches, she
goes along way that the eye witness
shouted not to kill but the deceased fired.

7. The eye witness, who was examined
as PW-6, improved his court statement and
said that when he reached at the place of
occurrence, the deceased and accused
were altercating and scuffling with each
other and the scuffling continued for five
minutes in their presence.

8. We feel it necessary to scan it again
and again, as the statements of the two on
this particular aspect of the case contradict
each other. The complainant says that when
the two reached chasing the accused fired
at the deceased but she kept mum
regarding the scuffling for five minutes. The
question is lurking about in mind that
whether their presence on the spot is natural
and as to whether the two have come with
nothing but the truth. The postmortem report
has shown only one entry and exit wound

but nowhere it is mentioned that the
deceased had any marks of violence or
bruises on his body.

9. This is strange that the complainant
came after the deceased all at once but her
other son Tufail did not follow rather felt
himself comfortable at home. We are again
unable to understand that when the house of
the complainant and the eye witness PW-6
are separate, then how at the neck of time
the complainant informed the eye witness
and when they started from different houses
at different places and with considerable
distance from each other, how did they
reach together at the place of occurrence as
at the time of communicating to the
eyewitness (PW-6) by the complainant, the
destination of the accused and deceased
was not even known to the complainant.
This is unnatural that at 07:45 AM the
accused caught hold of the deceased and
the distance to the Hujra of Ismail took 15
minutes to reach ,why people in the streets
and on the way did not help in rescuing the
deceased from the accused and why the
destination was fixed as the Hujra of Ismail,

which even at the time of occurrence was
closed and even the owner of the Hujra has
not been examined.

10. What keeps us on guard is that, the
site plan was prepared on the pointation of
the complainant and the eye witness but
nowhere the houses of the two are shown.
We fail to understand that if the houses of
the complainant and eye witness were in the
same vicinity where-from they took 15
minutes to reach the place of occurrence,
then why they are shown approaching from
two different directions and both in opposite
side 13 paces each from the deceased. The
complainant later tried to justify that she
informed the eye witness through telephone
which was hushed by the eyewitness as he
kept mum on this aspect of the case, so
much so no CDR or mobile phone was given
to the police and collected, we cannot hold
but to say that the witnesses are interested
and chance witnesses.

11. The time of occurrence has been
shown as 8.00 A.M., the place of occurrence
is on the brink of main Swabi Jehangira
mettaled road and the inter-se distance
between the spot and Police Station though

shown as 15/16 kilometer, but in fact this

Pa
distance is less than 3 kilometer, which was
also conceded by the learned AAG
appearing for the State as he hails from the
same area, and the report was made at 9.40
A.M., the compiainant to cover the delay
spoke that the dead body was lying on spot
for 30/40 minutes on cot and thereafter
shifted to the Police Station for report. This
does not end here, PW-8, who identified the
dead body before the police, stated that he
being zamindar by profession was informed
by the eyewitness of the occurrence on
which he rushed to the Police Station and
reached sharp at 9.30 A.M. and in his
presence the complainant reported the
matter. The Investigation Officer was
examined as PW-9, who without any
hesitation stated that he was busy on the
spot at 9.30 A.M. and this 9.30 is the time
when the report had then not been made. It
troubles more as the doctor mentions the
time of occurrence as 12.00 A.M. The
collective effect leads to an_ irresistible
conclusion that the report was made after
preliminary investigation.

12. The pistol has been shown recovered

from possession of the accused, which was
sent to Laboratory on 15.02.2014 along with
30 bore empty allegedly recovered from
spot. This evidence moved the learned trial
court heavily but to our surprise the learned
trial court went in ignorance and did not take
the exercise to assess as to when the
accused was arrested, when the pistol was
recovered and that when the pistol with
empty was received to the FSL. This is on
record that the accused was arrested on the
same day i.e. on 12.02.2014 by the police of
the same Police Station and a 30 bore pistol
was shown recovered from the accused and
in this respect FIR No.27 dated 12.02.2014
u/s 13 AO/15 AA Police Station Tordher was
registered and the Moharrir says that the
pistol was kept in the Malkhana and it was
on 14.02.2014 that the accused/appellant
during investigation declared it the weapon
of offence. The Investigating Officer on
15.02.2014 wrote application to the Director
FSL and both the pistol and empty was
received to the FSL on 17.02.2014. We are
curious to know that when the accused was
arrested on 12.02.2014, which is the date of
occurrence along with the pistol by the

police of the same Police Station where the
10

report was made and even the Investigating
Officer was of the same Police Station and
pistol was placed in the Malkhana of the
same Police Station, then why not it was
taken as case property or the weapon of
offence on the day it recovered and why the
empty was not sent earlier, it leads nowhere
but to hold that the pistol was later on
planted and the empty was later on created,
so this takes us to hold that the recovery
and positive report cannot be taken as
evidence and it has lost its sanctity.

In case titled Abdul Jabbar and
another Vs. The State (2019 SCMR 1239) it
has been held that:-

“Apart from stated above only
three empties were recovered from the
place of occurrence which were taken
into possession on 18.11.2003. The
appellant Abdul Jabbar as well as Akhtar
Abbas were arrested on 24.11.2003 and
the recovery of their respective weapons
i.e. pistol .30 bore and revolver .32 bore
were affected on the same day, but due
to inefficiency of local police, the empties
which were recovered on 18.11.2003 were
sent to the Forensic Science Laboratory
on 03.12.2003. Till then recovery from the
appellants was already _ effected,

therefore, such a lapse at the part of the
investigating officer had made_ the
recovery from the appellants ineffective

and of no consequence. The benefit of
the same is surely to be extended in

favour of the appellants.....”

11

13. The medical evidence is in conflict
with the ocular account. If we go with the
statement of the complainant that at the time
of firing, the accused/appellant was holding
the deceased, if we say yes to her stance,
then the distance comes to inches and in
such a situation the barrel would touch the
body of the deceased, then the injury would
have the charring marks, so the ocular
account of the complainant even on this
aspect of the case holds no ground and it
labels the complainant as untrustworthy and
yet again the eyewitness mentions five
minutes scuffle between the two but no
bruises and marks of violence were present
on body of the deceased.

In case titled Abdul Jabbar Vs. The
State (2019 SCMR 129), it has further been
held that:-
“it is the settled principle of law that
once a single loophole is observed in a
case presented by the prosecution much
less glaring conflict in the ocular account
and medical evidence or for that matter
where presence of eyewitnesses is not
free from doubt, the benefit of such
loophole/lacuna in the prosecution case
automatically goes in favour of an
accused. At the cost of reiteration, it has
been observed by us that, in a case
where the learned appellate court, after
reappraisal of entire evidence available

on record, has reached the conclusion
that there is unexplained delay in lodging

a)
12

the FIR; the presence of eyewitnesses is
not established; there are irreparable
dents in the case of prosecution; the
recovery is ineffective and is of no
consequence; the ocular account is
belied by the medical evidence; the
motive behind the occurrence is far from
being proved and almost non-existent,
the said court fell in gross error in
maintaining the conviction of the
appellants particularly on a_ capital
charge. In these circumstances and after
an independent evaluation of evidence
available on record, we have no manner
of doubt in our minds that the
prosecution has not been able to prove
its case against the appellants beyond
reasonable doubt”.

14. The motive advanced was not proved
as no independent witness was produced to
confirm the motive part of the story and
when motive alleged is not proved, then it is
only and only the prosecution to suffer. We
are conscious of the fact that it is a case of
single accused and substitution is a rare
phenomena but this aspect alone will not
absolve the court of its liability to judge with
care and caution. The courts, while
awarding sentence on capital charges, are
to be very careful and vigilant lest the
innocent will suffer and the wrong done can
never be undone.

15. The discussion made above leads us
to an inescapable conclusion that the

prosecution had failed to prove its case
13

against the appellant beyond reasonable
doubt. This appeal is, therefore, allowed, the
conviction and sentence of the appellant
recorded by the learned trial court is set
aside and is acquitted of the charge by
extending the benefit of doubt to him. He
shall be released from the jail forthwith, if not
required to be detained in connection with
any other offence.

The Murder Reference No.01 of 2018
is answered in the negative.
16. Above are the reasons of our short

order of even date, which is as follows:-

"For the reasons to be recorded later on, this
appeal is accepted, the conviction and sentence
imposed upon the appellant by the learned
Additional Sessions Judge-ll, Camp Court, Lahor,
Swabi, vide his judgment dated 20.01.2018 is set
aside and the appellant namely Ghani-ur-Rehman
s/o Habib-ur-Rehman, charged under section 302
PPC vide FIR No.26 dated 12.02.2014, is acquitted
of the charges levelled against him. He shall be
teleased from jail forthwith, if not required to be
detained in connection with any other case.

The Murder Reference is answered in the

negative”.

;
Po we

JUDGE Wu

JUDGE
Announced.
12.09.2019.

Sadiq Shah PS (DB) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Rooh-ul-Amin Khan & Hon'ble Mr. Justice
Sahibzada Asadullah.

Cc
