IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
PESHAWAR,
Judicial Department].

Cr.A. No.263-P/2015

Date of hearing:- 09.03.2017

Petitioner(s):- Zuhrab Gul by Mr. Noman ul Hag Kakakhel,
Advocate.

Respondent (s):-The State by Syed Sikandar Hayat Shah, AAG and
respondent No.2 by Barrister Amirullah Chamkani.

JUDGMENT

ROOH-UL-AMIN KHAN, _J:-This criminal appeal filed
by appellant Zuhrab Gul, is directed against the judgment
dated 28.04.2015, rendered by learned Trial
Court/Additional Sessions Judge-V, Nowshera, whereby
the appellant having been found guilty of committing
various offences, has been convicted and sentenced in case
FIR No.717 dated 20.08.2012 under _ sections
302/324/449/148/149 PPC, Police Station Nowshera
Kalan, as under:-

Under section 302 PPC: To death on six
counts for murder of deceased Suleman,
Shehzad, Ijaz, Mst. Raima, Mst. Asma and
Mst. Sehrish. To be hanged by the neck till
declared dead and to pay Rs.10,00,000/- to
the LRs of the deceased as compensation in
terms of section 544-A Cr.P.C. and in default
thereof to undergo 01 year S.I.

Under Section 324 PPC:- To undergo
imprisonment for 10 years and to pay a fine
of Rs.50,000/- or in default thereof to
undergo 03 months S.I.

Under Section 337-F (iii) PPC: To undergo
imprisonment for 03 years and to pay
Rs.40,000/- as Daman to injured Zakir.
Under section 148 PPC: To undergo

imprisonment for 03 years.

Under section 449 PPC: To undergo

imprisonment ofr 10 years and to pay a fine

of Rs.50,000/-.

All the sentences have been directed to be

run concurrently and benefit of section 382-B

Cr.P.C. has been extended to the appellant.
2. The learned Trial Court has sent Murder Reference
No.08 of 2015, in terms of Section 374 Cr.P.C. for
confirmation of death sentence of the appellant-convict.
Since, both the matters are the outcome of one and the
same judgment of the learned Trial Court, therefore, we
propose to decide the same through this single judgment.
3. As per contents of First Information Report, on
20.08.2012 at 00.20 hours, injured Suleman in company of
injured Zakir, reported to Mumtaz Khan SHO (PW.11), in
emergency unit of Divisional Headquarter (DHQ) hospital,
Nowshera, that on the fateful night he along with his wife
Mst. Raima, cousin Zakir, brothers Shehzad, Ijaz, maternal
cousins Mst. Asma and Mst. Sehrish, was present in his
house. Electric bulb of the house was lit when at 23.45
hours, appellant Zuhrab Gul along with absconding
co-accused Sahib Gul, Maqsood, Manzoor and Ibrar, duly
armed with firearms, entered their house and opened fire at
them, as a result, he and Zakir sustained injuries. Similarly,
Shehzad, Ijaz, Mst. Rima, Mst. Asma and Mst. Sehrish

also got hit and died on the spot. Abduction of a girl of

accused family, namely, Mst. Raima for the purpose of
marriage by Suleman was stated as motive behind the
crime. In addition to complainant, the incident is stated to
have been witnessed by PW Zakir and other inmates of the
house. Report of the injured was reduced into writing in
the shape of Murasila Exh.PA/1, which besides the thumb
impression of complainant and signature of author of the
Murasila, was endorsed by Dr. Mujtaba Ali (MO) DHQ,
Nowshera who also furnished a certificate qua stability and
consciousness of the injured at the time of report, on the
margin of the report.

4. Mumtaz Khan SHO (PW.11) prepared injury
sheets of injured Suleman Exh.PW.11/1 and injured Zakir
Exh.PW.11/2 and referred them for medical examination.
Dr. Mujtaba Ali examined them and furnished their
medico legal reports over Exh.PW.11/1 and Exh.PW.11/2.
Injured Suleman, later on, succumbed to the injuries,
hence, his autopsy was conducted by Dr. Iftikhar Ahamd
(PW.5) in KMC.

5. The dead bodies of the deceased were also brought
to DHQ, Nowshera. Dr. Mujtab Ali (PW.5) conducted
postmortem examination on the dead body of deceased
Shehzad and Ijaz, while Lady Doctor Bushra Nisar WMO
DHQ, Nowshera (PW.16), conducted postmortem
examination on the dead bodies of deceased Mst. Raima

and Mst. Sehrish.
6. On arrest of the appellant and completion of
necessary investigation, challan was submitted against him
before the learned Trial Court, where he was formally
charge sheeted to which he pleaded not guilty and claimed
Trial. To prove its case prosecution examined as many as
seventeen witnesses. After closure of the prosecution
evidence, statement of the appellant was recorded under
section 342 Cr.P.C., wherein he denied the prosecution
allegations and professed his innocence. He, however,
neither wished to be examined on oath as his own witness
under section 340 (2) Cr.P.C. nor opted to produce
evidence in defence. On conclusion of trial, the learned
Trial Court, after hearing both the sides, convicted and
sentenced the appellant as mentioned above, hence, this
appeal.

7. We heard the exhaustive arguments of learned
counsel for the parties and learned AAG for the State and
perused the record with their able assistance.

8. Without dilating upon the merits of the case on the
available evidence, lest it may prejudice the case of either
side, suffice to say that the prosecution case besides the
ocular account of PWs Zakir and Sardar, rests on the dying
declaration of deceased then injured Suleman in the shape
of Murasila Exh.PA/1 which has not only been endorsed
by Dr. Mujtaba Ali (PW.5), but has also furnished a

certificate on its margin qua the consciousness and
capability of the deceased then injured to make a
statement. The examination of deceased then injured and
injured Zakir by Dr. Mujtaba Ali is also evident from the
medico legal reports, furnished over Exh.PW.11/1 and
Exh.PW.11/2. Though the said doctor during trial has been
examined as PW.5, but he has furnished statement only to
the extent of conducting autopsy on the dead bodies of
deceased Shahzad and Ijaz, and has not been examined to
the extent of initial examination of deceased then injured
Suleman and = injured Zakir, that’s why in
cross-examination when he was replying a question posed
by the defence regarding examination of injured Suleman,
he responded in the negative. The medico legal reports of
deceased then injured Suleman, injured Zakir and
endorsement and certificate over the dying declaration,
bear the signatures of Dr. Mujtaba Ali, but due to
omission, mistake or misunderstanding he could not be
examined in this regard. Even otherwise, in the statement
of Dr. Mujtaba Ali, the defence by itself has confirmed
from this PW that he was the only male doctor present in
DHQ hospital Nowshera at the time of report. On one
hand, in this untoward incident, six persons have been
done to death and one has sustained injuries, while on the
other hand, five persons have been directly charged for the
commission of offence. In case of non-examination of Dr.

Mujtaba Ali to the extent of initial examination of the
deceased then injured and verifying the factum of his
making report in his presence would not only amount to
deprive the prosecution from important evidence but this
Court will also face hardship in administering the justice,
hence, may results in grave miscarriage of justice. Thus,
re-examination of Dr.Mujtaba Ali appears to be essential
to the just decision of the case. This Court being an
appellate Court has wide jurisdiction under section 428
Cr.P.C. to direct additional evidence so as to avoid any
injustice. For the sake of convenience, we would like to
reproduce section 428 Cr.P.C.:-

“S.428. Appellate Court may take further
evidence or direct to be taken:- (1) In dealing
with any appeal under this Chapter, the
appellate Court, if it thinks additional
evidence to be necessary, shall record its
reasons and may either take such evidence
itself or direct it to be taken by a Magistrate
or, when the Appellate Court is a High
Court, by a Court of session or a Magistrate.

(2) When the additional evidence is
taken by the Court of Session or the
Magistrate, it or he shall certify such
evidence to the Appellate Court and such
Court shall thereupon proceed to dispose of
the appeal;

(3) Unless the Appellate Court otherwise
directs, the accused or his pleader shall be
present when the additional evidence is

taken...
(4) The taking of evidence under this
section shall be subject to the provision of

Chapter XXV as if it were an inquiry”.

The bare reading of section 428 Cr.P.C. reveals that if an
Appellate Court while dealing with an appeal thinks that
recording of additional evidence is necessary, it shall
record its reasons and can either take such evidence itself
or direct it to be taken by Magistrate or where the
Appellate Court is a High Court, by a Court of Session.
The main object of section 428 Cr.P.C. relating to
production of additional evidence is that a guilty person
should not escape through carelessness or ignorant
proceedings of the Trial Court or innocent person should
not be wrongly accused when the Court, through same
carelessness or ignorance, had omitted to record the
circumstances essential to explanation or reach at the truth.
It may be noted that section 428 Cr.P.C. is not meant for
either of the parties to a criminal case, but its object is to
see that justice is done. This section can be pressed into
service for the ends of justice, whenever it is required
either for prosecution or for defence, keeping in view
requirement of Society because before a criminal Court
there is always a third party namely the Society. It may
also be noted that power to record additional evidence at
the appellate stage is to be exercised only where additional

evidence either was not available at the Trial or party
concerned _was prevented from producing the same by

circumstances beyond its control or by reasons of

misunderstanding or mistake. In case titled, “Ali and

another Vs Crown” (PLD 1952 Federal Court 71), while
dealing with identical controversy observed as under:-
“A brief survey of reported cases discloses
that, despite the wide terms in which the
power is expressed, it has only been exercised
where the additional evidence was either not
available at the trial or the party concerned
was prevent from producing it either by
circumstances beyond its control or by reason
of misunderstanding or mistake”.
The aforesaid view was further refined in case
titled, “Fazal Elahi and others Vs Crown” (PLD 1952
Lahore 388), in the following words:-

“The powers to be exercised by an appellate Court
under section 428 are subject to two overriding
consideration: (1) That the additional evidence is
considered to be necessary by the appellate Court
in the interest of justice; and (2) that the accused
is not denied his right to a fair trial.

While exercising these powers Courts of
Criminal Appeal in this country should never
overlook the basic position that the duty of a
criminal Court is fundamentally different from
that of a Court of Civil Appeal. While the latter is
a tribunal inter partes, the Court of Criminal
Appeal always has a third party before it, namely,
society, and its discretionary powers are not
controlled by rules of stopped, waiver, etc.
Therefore, negligence, laches, even admission by
counsel are not a bar to the Court’s exercising the
power to take further evidence, provided the
power is intended to be exercised in the interest of
justice and the accused is not prejudiced in his
defence on the merits.

As regards the taking of additional
evidence, I think we have power to take it on any
point bearing upon the guilt or innocence of the
accused, that is to say, it may bear on his guilt or
it may bear on his innocence. For the interest of
justice are not always identical with the interests
of the accused, and if in the present case we were
told that we filled gaps for the prosecution, we
should accept the accusation only if we thought
that our function was not to do justice to the
accused and to the person whom he is alleged to
have killed, but to find a pretext for acquitting the
accused. In that case, we would be doing injustice
to the deceased person and the society for the
reason that the society was inefficiently
represented at the time of the trial. For the same
reason, I am not impressed by the argument that
questions put by the Court of appeal should not be
in the nature of cross-examination. If the power to
call in evidence lies with the Court and the Court
exercise it, I do not understand why it should
sometimes have to say to the prosecution: “I am
not going to cross-examine the witness lest I
should betray an anxiety to bring out the truth.” If
indeed the object of cross-examination is to bring
out the truth”.

In case titled, “Dildar Vs the State through Pakistan

Narcotics Control Board Quetta” (PLD 2001 Supreme

Court 384), the Hon’ble Supreme Court was pleased to

enunciate the principle as guideline for additional evidence

in the following words:-

“Where the Appellate Court considers
additional evidence to be necessary, after
recording its reason, the Appellate Court
may take such evidence itself or direct the
same to be taken by the Trial Court. Such
powers and provisions are not to be utilized
at the appellate stage to cure the inherent
infirmities or fill up a lacuna in the
prosecution case. Appellate Court can
exercise such powers only where the
additional evidence was either not available
at the Trial or the party concerned was
10

present from producing it either by

circumstances beyond its control or by

reasons of misunderstanding or mistake”.
The same proposition came up before the worthy Sindh
High Court in case title, “Nasir Khan and others Vs the
State”, (2005 P Cr L J 01), and the additional evidence
was directed to be recorded. In case titled, “Taqi Vs the
State” (PLD 1991 Quetta 39), the worthy Balochistan
High Court while dealing with the same proposition has
held that under sections 428 Plenary power vests in
Appellate Forums to rectify omission or commission of
trial Court for achieving ends of justice. Jurisdiction of
High Court for recalling witnesses to clarify the position
or recording additional evidence is very wide, indefinable,
extraordinary and limitless. Criteria regulating such
authority, however, mainly would be to administer real
and substantial justice and to prevent abuse of the process
of Court. In the said judgment the Hon’ble Court has
emphasized that the High Court can even suo motu
summon evidence aimed at promoting ends of justice.
9. Apart from section 428 Cr.P.C., this Court under
section 540 Cr.P.C. has ample power to examine or recall
and re-examine any person if his evidence appears to be
essential to the just decision of the case. For the sake of
convenience, we would like to reproduce section 540

Cr.P.C. below:-
11

“Power to summon material witness or
examine persons present:- Any Court may, at
any stage of any inquiry, trial or other
proceeding under this Code, summon any
person as a witness, or examine any person in
attendance, though not summoned as a
witness, or recall and re-examine any person
already examined; and the Court shall
summon and examine or recall and _ re-
examine any such person, if his evidence
appears to it essential to the just decision of
the case”.

The words “any Court” and words “at any stage of any
inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Code”,
are of significant importance. The bare reading of the
section reveals that it has two parts. The first is
discretionary in nature whereas the second is mandatory.
It is to be noted that the only purpose of judicial
proceedings in criminal cases is to find out the truth and
to arrive at a correct conclusion and avoid any injustice.
Under section 540 Cr.P.C. the Court has unfettered
powers to compulsorily examine any person whose
evidence will provide help to elucidate the truth for
reaching at a just and fair conclusion of the case.

9. In the circumstances of the case and deriving
wisdom from the judgments (supra), we are of the
considered view that non-examination of Dr. Mujtaba Ali
with regard to Medico legal reports of the two injured and

endorsement on Murasila/ certificate qua consciousness of
12

Suleman deceased then injured is a serious omission on
the part of prosecution as well as Trial Court, which being
essential for just decision of the case, would not amount
to fill up any lacuna, rather after his examination the
Court will be able to do justice between the parties. It is
also pertinent to mention that the prosecution has not
made any request for examination of Dr. Mujtaba Ali,
rather, this Court considers his re-examination as essential
for its own aid to reach at a correct conclusion.
Resultantly, the impugned judgment of the learned Trial
Court is set aside along with conviction and sentences of
the appellant and the case is remanded to the learned Trial
Court for re-examination of Dr. Mujtaba Ali with regard
to medico legal reports of injured Zakir and Suleman
deceased then the injured and endorsement/certificate on
Murasila, providing opportunity of cross-examination to
the defence and thereafter to record the statement of the
appellant under section 342 Cr.P.C. and defence evidence,
if any, then to decide the case afresh in accordance with
law as early as possible but not later than three months.
Parties are directed to appear before the learned Trial
Court on 29.03.2017. Office shall transmit the record to
the learned Trial Court, within two days, positively.
During this period the appellant shall remain as under trial

prisoner.
13

10. On setting aside of the conviction and sentences
of the appellant-convict, the connected Murder
Reference No.08 of 2015, sent by the learned Trial Court
in terms of section 374 Cr.P.C., is answered in the

Negative.

Announced:
09.03.2017

Siraj Afridi P.S.

JUDGE

JUDGE
