Judgment Sheet
PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, BANNU BENCH
(Judicial Department)

Cr. A No.231-B of 2019
Muhammad Wagif
Vs.

The State etc
JUDGMENT

For Appellant: Mr. Mir Zali Khan Khattak, Advocate

For Respondents: Mr. Salamat Shah Mehsood, Advocate for
respondent No.1

For State: Sardar Muhammad Asif, Asstt: AG for the State

Date ofhearing: 05.04.2022

+keRH
SAHIBZADA ASADULLAH, J.- The appellant, Muhammad
Wagif, has called in question the judgment dated 11.07.2019,
rendered by learned Additional Sessions Judge-I, Karak,
whereby, the appellant was convicted under section 302(c)
P.P.C. and sentenced to imprisonment for ten years and held
that the murder of deceased was the outcome of an immoral and
unnatural offence, he was not Mausam-ud-Dum, therefore, no
compensation was awarded to his legal heirs in terms of section
544-A Cr.P.C. Benefit of section 382-B Cr.P.C was also
extended in favour of convict / appellant, while co-accused
Malool Nawaz was acquitted of the charges leveled.

2. Complainant, Khub Niaz, moved criminal revision
petition No.52-B/2019 for enhancement of sentence of

appellant and Cr.A No.227-B/2019 against acquittal of co-
accused Malool Nawaz. Since all the three matters have arisen
out of the same judgment, therefore, we intend to decide the
same through this common judgment.

3. The prosecution case, as per contents of F.I.R Ex: PA, is
that complainant Khub Niaz brought dead body of his deceased
brother Ameen Ullah with the help of co-villagers to the Police
Station Latamber and lodged report to the effect that on
eventful day, he and his brother Ameen Ullah were proceedings
to Mohabati Kala for some domestic work and when they
reached the place of incident, at 14:20 hours, convict / appellant
alongwith co-accused Malool Nawaz, armed with
Kalashnikovs, appeared from southern side of tube well, asked
them not to move and started firing at them, as a result of
which, his brother Ameen Ullah got hit and died on the spot,
while the complainant luckily escaped unhurt. The accused
after commission of the offence decamped from the spot.
Motive for the offence was stated that accused were forbidden
from wandering with their enemies. Hence, the FIR ibid.

4. After completion of investigation and arrest of the
accused, prosecution submitted juvenile challan against him,
where at the commencement of trial, the prosecution produced
and examined as many as 10 witnesses. On close of prosecution
evidence, statement of accused was recorded under section 342

Cr.P.C, wherein he professed innocence and false implication,
however, neither he opted to be examined on oath as provided
under section 340(2) Cr.P.C, nor wished to produce defence
evidence. After hearing arguments, the learned trial Court vide
impugned judgment dated 11.07.2019, convicted and sentenced
the accused /appellant Muhammad Wadqif as mentioned above
while accused Malool Nawaz earned his acquittal, hence, the
instant appeals and revision against the judgment of
conviction. Since all the three matters have arisen out of the
same judgment, therefore, we intend to decide the same through
this common judgment.

5. We have heard learned counsel for the parties alongwith
learned A.A.G for the State at length and with their valuable
assistance, the record was gone through.

6. The unfortunate incident claimed the life of the deceased
and the matter was reported with the Police Station Latamber,
on 27.12.2017 against the appellant and another. After
registration of the case, the injury sheet and inquest report were
prepared, whereafter, the dead body was sent to the doctor for
postmortem examination. The investigating officer after
receiving copy of the F.LR visited the spot and on pointation of
the eye witness prepared the site plan. During spot inspection,
the investigating officer collected blood stained earth from the

place of the deceased alongwith 24 empties of 7.62 bore from
the spot. During spot inspection, the investigating officer also
observed bullet marks on the walls of the tube well.

7. The collected empties were sent to the F irearms Expert to
ascertain as to whether those were fired from one or different
weapons. It is pertinent to mention that the accused / appellant
was arrested on 01.01.2018, whose physical custody was
requested and during interrogation he expressed his willingness
to record his confessional statement. The appellant was
produced before the court of Judicial Magistrate on 04.01.2018,
who was provided an opportunity to think and reconsider his
option to confess, but after the learned Magistrate got fully
satisfied, his confessional statement was recorded. It is
pertinent to mention that at the time of his arrest, a Kalashnikov
was recovered from his possession which was sent to the Fire
Arms Expert along with the collected empties. The expert after
chemical analysis came to the conclusion that out of 24, 16
empties were fired from the Kalashnikov recovered from his
possession.

8. | When the investigation was completed, challan was
submitted before the competent court of law and ultimately vide
the impugned judgment, the learned trial court was pleased to
convict the appellant as stated above. -

9. The learned trial court convicted the appellant vide the

impugned judgment after the collected evidence was thoroughly
appreciated, but this being the court of appeal is eager to re-
assess the already assessed evidence, so that miscarriage of
justice could be avoided. As the learned trial court was having
two different narrations of the same story before it, so it took
pain to appreciate the different aspects of the case. It is evident
from the record that while reporting the matter the complainant
disclosed that while in the company of the deceased when they
reached to the place of incident, the accused i.e. Wagqif and
Malool sons of Azam duly armed appeared and started firing at
them which resulted into the death of the deceased. Contrarily,
the appellant after his arrest when was produced before the
court of Judicial Magistrate, he confessed his guilt and as such
his confessional statement was recorded, where he admitted the
death of the deceased, but in a different manner. The learned
trial court after due deliberation and application of its judicial
mind to the collected evidence, though disbelieved the version
given by the complainant, but accepted the story narrated by the
appellant and the subsequent recoveries and as such instead of
convicting the appellant under section 302(b) P.P.C, chose to
convict the appellant under section 302(c) P.P.C.

10. We are to determine as to whether the incident occurred
in the manner as given by the complainant in his First

Information Report or it occurred in the way as disclosed by the

appellant in his confessional statement, duly recorded before
the court of Judicial Magistrate. This court is to ascertain that
once the stance of the complainant was disbelieved then what
the normal course should have been with the learned trial court
i.e. to acquit or to convict the appellant. We are to search out as
to whether the awarded sentence fits in the given circumstances
of the case.

11. There is no denial to the fact that soon after the incident,
the dead body was shifted to the local police station, where the
matter was reported and that after the injury sheet and inquest
report were prepared, the dead body was shifted to the doctor
for post mortem examination. After receiving copy of the F.LR,
the investigating officer visited the spot and on pointation of the
complainant prepared the site plan. During spot inspection the
investigating officer collected blood stained earth from the
place of the deceased and 24 empties of 7.62 bore from the
spot. The investigating officer investigated the case from
different angles, but when the appellant was arrested, the
situation changed. As the appellant confessed his guilt before
the competent court of law and also the weapon recovered from
his possession wedded with 16 empties, collected from the spot,
so this court is to see that which of the story is nearer to the

truth and which not.

12, It was extensively argued that when the eye witness
account was disbelieved and that when the appellant came
forward with a different story, then in such eventuality the
conduct of the complainant cannot be condoned and in case his
narration is not believed, then the same will lead to an outright
acquittal of the appellant. We are not persuaded with what the
learned counsel for the appellant submitted, rather we are to
travel an extra-mile to determine the status of the witnesses
examined and the credibility of the stories they came forward
with. Yes, the confessional statement of the appellant twisted
the prosecution case and to untwist the same, extra care and
caution is needed. Leaving aside for a while the story forwarded
by the complainant, we would like to dilate upon the
evidentiary value of the confessional statement and the
recoveries effected from possession of the appellant.

13. The appellant soon after his arrest was produced before
the court of Judicial Magistrate where he confessed his guilt.
The learned Judicial Magistrate appeared before the trial court
as PW-09 who stated that on 04.01.2018 the appellant was
produced by the local police for recording his confessional
statement, the accused was provided ample opportunity to re-
think and recompose himself and that after gaining satisfaction
regarding the willingness of the appellant to confess, he

recorded his confessional statement. This witness was cross-
examined on material aspects of the case but nothing
detrimental could be extracted from his mouth and that the
learned Judicial Magistrate fully complied with the guidelines
and parameters provided both by the superior courts as well as
in the High Court Rules & Orders. The learned counsel for the
appellant could not succeed in inviting our attention to any
illegality caused or irregularity committed. After taking into
consideration the precautions taken by the learned Judicial
Magistrate and the happy mood of the appellant to confess his
guilt, we lurk no doubt in mind that the same was validly
recorded and voluntarily made as is held in case titled “The
State v. Minhum (PLD 1964 SC 813):

"Retracted confessions, whether judicial or
extra-judicial, could legally be taken into
consideration against the maker of those
confessions himself, and if the confessions
were found to be true and voluntary, then
there was no need at all to look for further
corroboration. As against the maker himself
his confession, judicial or extra-judicial,
whether retracted or not retracted, can in law
validly form the sole basis of his conviction, if
the Court is satisfied and believes that it was
true and voluntary and was not obtained by
torture or coercion or inducement. The
question, however, as to whether in the facts
and circumstances of a. given case the Court

should, act upon such a confession alone is an

14.
while confessing his guilt is natural and that the record could
not persuade that the same was the outcome of influence,
coercion or inducement. Once this court reaches to a definite
conclusion that the confessional statement was validly recorded
then this court is to assess the available record as to what
should be the appropriate sentence and also to determine as to
whether the only confessional statement of the accused/
appellant can be pressed into service to convict him for the
offence charged. The Apex Court has dealt with the matter in

case titled “Mst. Joygun Bibi v. The State” (PLD 1960 (SC

entirely different question, which relates to
the weight and evidentiary value of the

confession and not to its admissibility in law.”

The sequence in which the appellant narrated the events

(Pak) 313) in the following manner:

"We are unable to support the proposition of
law laid down by the learned Judges in this
regard. The retraction of a confession is a
circumstance which has no bearing whatsoever
upon the question whether in the first instance
it was voluntarily made, and on the further
question whether it is true. The fact that the
maker of the confession later does not adhere to
it cannot by itself have any effect upon the
findings reached as to whether the confession
was voluntary, and if so, whether it was true,

for to withdraw from a self-accusing statement
-10-

in direct face of the consequences of the
accusation, is explicable fully by the proximity
of those consequences and need have no
connection whatsoever with either its voluntary
nature, or the truth of the facts stated. The
learned Judges were perfectly right in first
deciding these two questions, and the answers
being in the affirmative, in declaring that the
confession by itself was sufficient, taken with
the other facts and circumstances to support
Abdul Majid's conviction. The retraction of the
confession was wholly immaterial once it was
found that it was voluntary as well as true."
15. True that the complainant came forward with a different
story and equally true that the accused/ appellant after his arrest
narrated the events in a different manner, but in the given
circumstances this court is not absolved of the liability to test
the veracity of the confessional statement, its voluntary
character and the fulfillment of the legal requirements. We
cannot ignore that the accused/ appellant during the days of
incident was juvenile and that his confessional statement is the
narration of the true events which happened on the preceding
night. Nothing was brought on record by the defence to suggest
otherwise. The appellant while recording his statement before
the court of Judicial Magistrate explained in unequivocal terms

that the deceased committed sodomy with him and that he was

constantly tortured. The confessional statement further

-ll-

explained that after committing sodomy, the appellant was still
under the influence of the deceased and that after getting an
opportunity, he succeeded in killing the deceased to take
revenge. After assessing the evidence available on file, this
Court reaches to an inescapable conclusion that the case against
the appellant is proved to the hilt and that the impugned
judgment does not warrant interference. The instant criminal
appeal being bereft of merit, is hereby dismissed.

16. Through the connected criminal revision bearing No.52-
B/2019, the petitioner has prayed for enhancement of the
awarded sentence. In order to appreciate this particular aspect
of the case, we are to scan through the record to ascertain as to
whether the learned trial judge was justified in taking a lenient
view and as to whether the reasons advanced for awarding
lesser sentence finds support from the collected evidence and
recorded statements. It was argued by learned counsel for the
petitioner that sodomy was committed by the deceased with the
accused / appellant, on the preceding night of the incident and
the deceased was killed a day thereafter, so the question of
sudden provocation does not arise, as the emotions and anger of
the appellant had reduced to a greater extent and before he was
composed and in full control of his faculties. So, the learned
trial court failed to appreciate this particular aspect of the case

and fell in error to convict the appellant under section 302(c)
-12-

P.P.C instead of section 302(b) P.P.C, where the normal penalty
is only and only death sentence. He further submitted that the
learned trial court was well within its competence to award
imprisonment for life as Tazir instead of blessing the appellant
with a sentence under section 302(c) P.P.C. He concluded that
the impugned judgment to the extent of the awarded sentence is
arbitrary, mechanical and without application of judicial mind,
which calls for interference. We are not impressed with what
the learned counsel submitted, as different people react
differently in particular circumstances of particular cases. True
that while confessing his guilt, the appellant explained that the
deceased committed sodomy with him on the preceding night,
but as he could not find an opportunity to get rid of the
deceased, so he kept on waiting and it was on the day of
incident, when he succeeded in killing the deceased. We are not
persuaded with submissions made at the bar regarding the
recession of emotions of the appellant, as the imprints created
on his mind did not vanish with the time, rather the unholy
thoughts haunted him constantly, searching for an opportunity
to do away with the deceased. The situation is further be
clarified by the Apex Court, in its recent reported judgment
"Raza and another v. The State and others" (2020 SCMR
1185), wherein it is held that:

"As observed earlier, that the occurrence had
-13-

taken place due to the act of the deceased,
which enraged the mental faculty of the
petitioner and under the impulses of the same
the instant occurrence had taken place, the
same is spelled out from the record and as
such the benefit of the same is available for
which so many circumstances are not required
rather the glimpse of the same is always
deemed sufficient, which has been established

by the Superior Court from time to time."

17. The attending circumstances of the case leads this Court
nowhere, but to hold that the learned trial judge was fully
justified to convict the appellant under section 302(c) P.P.C.
The same calls for no interference. The instant criminal appeal
being bereft of merit is hereby dismissed.

18. As the impugned judgment is maintained, so in such
eventuality, the instant criminal revision petition bearing
No.52-B/2019 as well as criminal appeal No.227-B/2019 have
lost its efficacy. The same cannot proceed further and are
dismissed as such.

Announced
05.04.2022
Ghafoor Zaman/Steno

an Sc
Nah ed (0.8)

: Hon'ble Mr. Justice Ishtiaq lbrahim &
Hon'ble Mr. Justice Sahibzada Asadullah

3 ) MAY 2022
