ak

Judgment Sheet
PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, BANNU BENCH
(Judicial Department)

Cr. A No.337-B of 2019.
Lutf-ur-Rehman & another
Vs.

The State etc

JUDGMENT

For Appellants: Mr. Sultan Mehmood Khan, Advocate.

For State: Mr. Saif-ur-Rehman Khattak, Addl: A.G.

For Respondents: Mr. Anwar Hussain, Advocates.

Date of hearing: 09.02.2022

Peres
SAHIBZADA ASADULLAH, J.- This judgment shall also
dispose of the connected Cr.A. No.360-B of 2019 titled Mst.
Moi Gula Vs. Arsala Khan etc’ and Cr.R. No.65-B of 2019 titled
“Mst. Moi Gula Vs. Shams-ur-Rehman etc’ as all the three
matters are the outcome of one and the same judgement dated
31.10.2019, rendered by learned Additional Sessions Judge,
Karak at Takht-e-Nasrati, whereby the appellants Lutf-ur-
Rehman and Shams-ur-Rehman were convicted under Section
302(b) PPC and sentenced to undergo imprisonment for life with
compensation of Rs.2,00,000/- each to be paid to the legal heirs
of deceased in terms of Section 544-A, Cr.P.C. or in default
thereof to suffer six months simple imprisonment. Benefit of

Section 382-B, Cr.P.C. was extended to both the
Q

-2-
convicts/appellants. Vide the same judgment, the co-accused
(respondents in the connected Cr.A. No.360-B/2019) were
acquitted of the charges levelled against them.

2. Brief facts of the case as divulged from the FIR,
lodged on the basis of Madd No.13 dated 15.12.2012, are that on
the eventful day, he alongwith Muhammad Islam son of Sakhi-
ur-Rehman and his mother Mst. Moi Gula was busy in cutting
Sarkanda plants in his fields situated within the limits of
Zarkhan Kalla near Indus Highway, when at about 10:30 hours,
accused Saqib, Imdad Ullah, Shams-ur-Rehman and Lutf-ur-
Rehman, came there and forbade them from cutting the
Sarkanda plants and on refusal he was assaulted with
hoes/Ganti; that accused Shams-ur-Rehman hit him with his hoe
on his head, while accused Lutf-ur-Rehman hit him with his
Ganti on his leg, whereas accused Saqib and Imdad were
administering fists and sticks blows, as a result of which he fell
to the ground; that in the meanwhile, accused Muhammad
Jamal, duly armed came there, asked the co-accused to get aside
and that today he is going to finish him; that Naheed-ur-Rehman
and Raza Khan also reached there; that accused Muhammad
Jamal opened fire at all of them with the intention to kill them,
but luckily they escaped unhurt, all this happened on the

instigation of accused Arsala Khan. Besides the complainant, the
-3-
occurrence was stated to be witnessed by Muhammad Islam,
Mst. Moi Gula, Naheed-ur-Rehman and Raza Khan. Motive for
the offence was stated to be a dispute over landed property. He
charged the accused for commission of the offence.
Subsequently, the complainant succumbed to his injuries in the
hospital, therefore, Section 302 PPC was inserted in the FIR.

3. After completion of investigation, complete
challan was submitted against the accused before the trial Court,
where at the commencement of trial, the prosecution produced
and examined as many as fifteen witnesses, while Dr. Sadeeq
Ullah and Naeem Ullah S.I. were examined as CW-1 and CW-2,
respectively. On conclusion of the prosecution evidence, the
accused were examined under section 342 Cr.P.C, wherein they
professed innocence and false implication, however, neither they
opted to be examined on oath as provided under section 340(2)
Cr.P.C, nor produced defence evidence. After hearing
arguments, the learned trial Court vide the impugned judgment
dated 31.10.2019, convicted the accused/appellants and
sentenced them, as mentioned above, whereas the co-accused
were acquitted from the charges. Hence, the instant criminal
appeal as well as the connected criminal appeal against acquittal
of the co-accused and criminal revision for enhancement of

sentence awarded to the convicts/appellants.
~4-
4. We have heard learned counsel for the appellants,
the learned A.A.G for the State, assisted by learned counsel for
the complainant at length and with their valuable assistance, the

record was gone through.

5. It was on the day of incident i.e. 15.12.2012, that
the deceased alongwith the eye-witnesses visited the spot field to
cut shrubs locally known as Sarkanda, while busy in cutting that
in the meanwhile, the appellants along with co-accused attracted
to the spot and forbade them to cut the plants. When the
deceased refused to obey, the accused belaboured him with fists
and stick blows, whereas the convict/appellant Lutf-ur-Rehman
administered a blow with the hard side of a Ghanti (an
agricultural instrument) in his possession which landed on his
left foot, whereas from the Kahi (an agricultural instrument)
blow of the convict accused Shams-ur-Rehman, he received a
lacerated wound measuring 5 c.m in size on his scalp. He further
disclosed in his report that co-accused Muhammad Jamal after
reaching to the spot fired at the witnesses and the deceased but
they luckily escaped unhurt. The report further tells that besides
the eye-witnesses, some others, namely, Naveed ur Rehman and
Muhammad Raza, also witnessed the incident, who were not
produced. Soon after receiving injuries the deceased then injured

was shifted to the civil hospital Takht-e-Nasrati for treatment.
-5-
On arrival to the hospital the matter was reported in the shape of
daily diary No.13, duly endorsed by the deceased then injured,
whereas at the same time the doctor examined the injured and
prepared his medico-legal certificate, which shows an injury on
right side of scalp 5 c.m in size caused with sharp weapon and
also swelling on his left leg. Keeping in view the uncertain
character of the injuries caused, F.I.R could not be registered, as
by then the exact nature of the injuries was not known. The
injured after receiving first aid was referred to KDA hospital
Karak, for further treatment. In KDA Hospital Karak specialized
treatment was given and on X-ray fracture was detected. After
getting a sigh of relief the deceased then injured was referred to
Hayatabad Medical Complex Peshawar, where he was operated
for his leg and after remaining hospitalized for few days was

discharged from the hospital.

6. After spending few days at home, his condition
deteriorated and at last he lost his battle between life and death,
and on his death the F.I.R was chalked out under sections 302/
324/334/337-F(viy109/148/149 PPC, whereafter, the injury sheet
was prepared and also the inquest report. Besides the
postmortem examination Standing Medical Board was
constituted to ascertain the cause of his death, and after thorough

examination the board reached to the following conclusion:
-6-

“He had fracture (Lt) Tibia & Fibula,
for which he was operated in
Hayatabad Medical Complex Peshawar
on 21.12.2012. He suddenly collapsed
& died on 01.01.2013. Standing
Medical Board DHQ Hospital Karak
carried the postmortem examination on-
the request of CMO Type-C Hospital
Takhtin Nasrati Karak in his presence
and also in the presence of EDO Health
Karak Chairman Standing Medical
Board (MS) Karak.

A huge clot of blood about 10
cm in size was recovered from the
pulmonary trunk of dead body,
suggesting & clearing cause of death”.
7, The convicts/appellants alongwith their co-accused
faced the trial which ended in conviction of the appellants and
acquittal of the co-accused. Though, the learned trial Court did
its best to reappraise the evidence and to see the involvement of
the appellants and others in light of the collected and produced
evidence, which ultimately led to the conviction of the appellants
and acquittal of the co-accused. While going through the
impugned judgment, we observed hesitation on part of the
learned trial Judge regarding accuracy of the exact section of
law, to be more specific, the learned trial Court despite efforts
could not resolve the mystery created and fell into error in
exercising the easiest choice of awarding life imprisonment
under section 302(b) P.P.C. It is his lack of decision which keeps
us on guard with an urge to reassess the already assessed

evidence. We do not blame the learned trial Judge, who
-7-
convicted the appellants, rather he fell a prey to the mystery
created by the attending circumstances of the case. We deem it
appropriate to apply extra care to resolve as to whether the
awarded sentence meets the situation and that the appellants fully
deserved the treatment, and as such we feel it essential to touch
the undiscovered aspects of the case. The atmosphere of the case
has put us on caution to walk with care and to untwist the twists,

as by doing so, miscarriage of justice could be avoided.

8. True, that in the incident an innocent person lost
his life, and equally true that witnesses came forward in support
of their claim, but we are still to see as to whether the incident
occurred in the mode, manner and at the stated time. We are to
ask from the record the presence of the witnesses at the stated
time, who in turn are to establish their presence on the spot, that

too, with a specific purpose.

9. The Investigating Officer visited the spot, prepared
the site-plan on pointation of the witnesses. The blood stained
earth and empties could not be secured from the place of
incident, as the site-plan was prepared after registration of the
F.ILR on 01.01.2013. The site-plan depicts that the disputed
property was the ownership of the deceased, but the

Investigating Officer did not collect anything in that respect. Not
-8-
only the deceased but the accused also claimed the same to be
their ownership. The eye-witness disclosed in his court statement
that the same was purchased by the deceased then injured from
one Ajab Noor, but record is silent in that respect. Even the
Investigating Officer did not record the statement of the actual
owner from whom the property was allegedly purchased, so

much so his name does not figure in the calendar of witnesses.

10. As the matter was reported in the shape of Daily
Diary, the prosecution went with an understanding that until and
unless inquiry is conducted F.I.R cannot be registered, and as
such the statements of the witnesses could not be recorded soon
after the incident, this at the most can be taken a procedural
lapse, which cannot alone overturn the prosecution case. Though
we are not in agreement with what the prosecution did, rather an
F.I.R should have been registered soon after the injured was
received in the hospital, but we are not in a happy mood to weigh
it against the prosecution as for us the importance is the purpose
and intent behind, we are not hesitant to hold that the intention
was noble. True that some procedural lapses are there, but that
alone is not the sole criteria to adjudge, as we are yet to pick a lot

from the collected evidence. In case titled “Ashfaq Ahmad Vs

the State”(2007 SCMR641), it is held that:
-9-

“We have also observed certain minor
lapses on the part of investigation but it
cannot be equated to that of dishonest
investigation and such procedural lapse can
be ignored in view of the eye account
Surnished by Muhammad Irfan (P.W.2) and
Muhammad Rafi (P.W.3) which have been
rightly considered and relied upon by the
learned trial Court determination whereof
has been upheld by the learned Division
Bench of High Court after having gone
through the entire evidence with diligent
application of mind which is not only in
accordance with the settled norms of justice

but precedent law as mentioned above.”
11. The peculiar circumstances of the present case
demand a pragmatic and dynamic approach, as the litmus test
“falsus in uno falsus in omnibus” will not work alone, as in case
of disbelieving the eye-witness account we are to walk an extra
mile, as the matter was reported by the deceased then injured.
True that the complainant died after 15-days of his initial report,
but that alone will not help in forming an outright opinion
regarding the character of the deceased then injured and we
cannot readily accept that the declarent had malice to charge. We
are still to scan through the record and the collected evidence to
gauge the truthfulness of the complainant and the evidentiary
value of his statement. We are not eager to search for material

with the sole interest to convict, but we are anxious to avoid
-10-
miscarriage of justice at all cost, as we are not ready to sacrifice
justice, to appease the appetite of either side. We cannot ignore

that society prospers when justice prevails.

12. As the prosecution case rests on the sole testimony
of the eye-witness, medical evidence and the report made by the
deceased then injured, we are to determine as to whether the
incident occurred in the mode, manner and at the stated time,
with an additional attempt to know as to whether the witnesses
were present on the spot at the time of incident. Out of the lot
Muhammad Islam is the most important witness, who was
produced as PW-03, who stated that on the day of incident while
busy in cutting shrubs, the convicts/appellants alongwith others
assaulted the deceased. The witness specified the role played by
each accused. It was the number of accused which turned to be
the basis for insertion of sections 148/149 P.P.C with sections
302/324/337-F(vi)/109 P.P.C, but this is important to note that
all other accused are acquitted, as some were charged for kicks
and fists blows and one for ineffective firing. The learned trial
Court did not convict the appellants under section 148/149
P.P.C, as the prosecution could not succeed in proving that
particular aspect of the case. When such is the situation we are
left with the only choice to hold that the parties were engaged in

a free fight and in that eventuality instead of looking for joint
-ll-
liability, the role of every individual accused charged is to be
assessed on the basis of his involvement in the episode and the
role played. It is essential to explore that what led the learned
trial Court to acquit the co-accused of the charges and convicted
the appellants for the murder of the deceased. We are to collect
from the record the circumstances and evidence which led to
acquittal of the convicts/appellants under section 148/149 P.P.C.
In order to appreciate this particular aspect of the case, we are
left with the statement of PW Muhammad Islam, who was
examined as PW-03 and who is the sole eye-witness produced.
During his cross-examination he admitted grappling between the
parties and he also explained the way the deceased resisted. In
order to appreciate this particular aspect of the case, we deem it
essential to reproduce a portion of his cross-examination which
reads as follows:
“I cannot tell the exact time
consumed in the altercation between the
deceased and accused. Witness added
that after commanding stoppage by the
accused, the deceased Zahidullah told
the accused party that he is the owner of
the said property as the same had been
purchased by him from one Gul Ahjab
Khan and Anwar and refused to stop
cutting process after which accused

shams ur Rehman hit the deceased on

his head with his Kahi while accused
-12-

Lutfur Rehman hit him with Ginti on
his foot. Again stated that accused
Imdadullah and Saqibullah also gave
stick blows to the deceased then injured.
I and Mst. Mohi Gula, the mother of
deceased were not attempted by any
one. The fighting lasted for 3/6 minutes.
No one from the outside could reached
to the place of occurrence within house
5/6 minutes; however, Raza Khan and
Naheed had reached at a distance of 30
to 35 feet when deceased Zahidullah fell
to the ground, Deceased had not fallen
to the ground on the first blow and had
attempted a lot.”

13. The relevant portion from his cross-examination
has resolved the controversy regarding the counter claim of
ownership to the property and the ensuing free fight between the
parties and in case of a free fight the role played by every
accused is to be judged individually in light of the attending

circumstances of the case. In case titled “The State and another

Vs Umer Hayat and another (2011 SCMR 1527), it is held that:

“It is settled law that in a case of a free
fight every accused person is liable only
for the part played or the injury caused
by him. In the present case no
particular injury found on the body of
Muhammad Aslam (PW.15) had ever
been attributed to the present appellant.

In this view of the matter the then
-13-

hon'ble Chief Justice of the Lahore
High Court, Lahore has been found by
us to be unjustified in upholding and
maintaining the appellant’s convictions
and sentences on any head of the
charge framed against him. After
holding the case in hand to be a one of
a free fight the appellants could not
have been convicted for an offence
under section 148 P.P.C read with
section 149 P.P.C because there was no

common object between the culprits.
14. True that the prosecution failed to prove its case to
the extent of acquitted accused and equally true that its failure
will react upon veracity of the witnesses, and the defence also
focused on this particular aspect of the case, but with utmost
respect, we are not convinced with what was voiced for the
appellants, as besides the eye-witness account, we are to see the
report made by the deceased then injured, which on his death has
transformed itself into a dying declaration. When the eye-witness
account failed, in respect of some of the accused, whether the
same can be pressed into service in support of the dying
declaration. We cannot ignore that soon after the incident the
deceased then injured was rushed to the hospital, who was
examined by the doctor and his medico-legal certificate was
prepared, whereafter he was referred to KDA hospital, Karak,

and after getting confirmation regarding the fracture caused, the
-14-
deceased then injured was referred to Peshawar for specialized
treatment, where he remained hospitalized for few days and after
gaining stability was discharged from the hospital for further
management at home. We are to answer as to whether the report
was made by the complainant and as to whether at the time of
making report he was fully oriented in time and space. True that
no certificate was obtained from the concerned doctor, regarding
the capability to talk and even nothing was brought on record
that at the time when the deceased then injured was making the
report, he was alert and conscious. This aspect of the case cannot
be ignored that the deceased received a fracture on his leg which
later on turned to be the cause of his death. As the injury was on
non-vital part of the body and that the deceased then injured did
not die on the day of incident, this in itself is suggestive of the
fact that by the time the deceased then injured was fully
conscious. His subsequent travel from hospital to hospital and
his last management at home further clarifies the situation. The
attending circumstances of the case lends support to the report
made in the shape of dying declaration and even the subject of
dispute between the parties leaves no ambiguity, that both the
parties were claiming the property in question. The houses of the
accused/appellants are situated near the place of incident and the

use of weapons in their possession confirms that, they too, were
-15-
present in the spot field at the time of incident. The acquittal of
the co-accused is justified, as the prosecution failed to establish
their common object. The selection of weapons excludes the
possibility that the convict/appellant came to the spot with the
only intention to kill. Had they been attracted to the spot to kill
then the selection of weapons would have been different, as the
weapon used are ordinarily not used for killing. The eye-witness
account to the extent of unlawful assembly and its common
object has been disbelieved, but the co-accused were not
acquitted for the only reason that they were not present on the
spot, but were acquitted, as after assessment of the situation it
surfaced that the parties were engaged in a free fight, so in the
given circumstances the role of every accused was to be judged
on the basis of his individual performance. As the medical
evidence is silent regarding the injuries other than the injuries
caused by the appellants, so participation of the co-accused with
the intention to facilitate the convicts/appellants does not spell
out from the record. As the approach of learned trial Court on
this particular aspect of the case was correct and as the eye-
witness account was not disbelieved out rightly, so the defence
cannot press into service the maxim “falsus in uno falsus in
omnibus”, as still the prosecution has in its possession the

remaining evidence, which can be read together with the report
-16-
made by the deceased while injured and the opinion of Standing

Medical Board.

15. It has always been the subject of dispute, as to
whether the sole statement of a dying person can lead to
conviction and as to whether collection of supporting evidence is
yet a condition. The approach regarding dying declaration went
on changing constantly, but never ever its evidentiary value was
ignored. The controversy was never regarding its character, but
was regarding the fact that whether it alone was sufficient to
convict or it must seek corroboration from attending
circumstances of the case. We deem it essential to explore, that
when it decorated itself as one of the best piece of evidence and
that how it traveled to its present form? In medieval English
Courts the principle originated of “Nemo moriturus praesumitur
mentire”, “no-one on the point of death should be presumed to
be lying” In those cases where the expectations to die were less,
the jurists expressed their reservations to convict on this score
alone, with apprehension in mind that a declarant who was
uncertain of his death could use the same to take revenge, with
passage of time a balanced approach was reached to, and in
either case, it was emphasized that to convict an accused
charged, by a dying man in his report, apart from his statement

the attending circumstances of that particular case must be taken
-17-
into consideration. The importance of a dying declaration cannot
be overlooked as from time immemorial it got a permanent status
in the statutes. It has remained in the Evidence Act as section 32,
which was replanted as Article 46 of the Qanun-e-Shahadat
Order, 1984, which explains that, the statement of a dying man is
relevant and admissible in evidence it does not address the issue
of its evidentiary value. This aspect has been amply dealt with by
the case law. There is no dearth of decisions of the superior
Courts, both in Pakistan and India, which have discussed the
issue of evidentiary value of dying declaration and exact place in
the prosecution’s case. The keen interest of the superior courts in
this particular matter manifest the propensity of human being to
attach great importance to the statement of a dying man as it is
assumed that a man in such a situation would not tell a lie or
fabricate stories to implicate innocent person. At the same time,
keeping in view this natural tendency, the superior courts always
tend to caution the subordinate courts that dying declaration
should be subjected to close scrutiny and viewed in their
attending circumstances. Earlier the matter was looked into from
a different angle as by then it was the inherent worth of the dying
declaration that was opted for with no stress for corroboration. In
this respect we are fortified by, Sir Lionel Leach C.J. presiding

over full bench of Madras High Court observed, in re-
-18-
Guruswami (1940), that “it is not possible to lay down any hard
and fast rule when a dying declaration should be accepted,
beyond saying that each case must be decided in the light of
other facts and the surrounding circumstances, but if the court,
after taking everything into consideration, is convinced that the
statement is true, it is its duty to convict, notwithstanding that

there is no corroboration in the true sense.”

16. The same pattern was followed in one of the
famous case of Abdul Razaq (1964), the Peshawar High court
affirmed this principle, though impliedly, by stating that “it has
now been irrevocably held that it cannot be laid down as an
absolute rule of law that a dying declaration cannot form the sole
basis of the conviction unless it is corroborated” when the same
came before the apex Court, the Chief Justice Cornelius made
some valuable observations, it was observed by him that
believing or disbelieving dying declaration is not” an exercise in
application of law” rather it is “an application of simple human
judgment. There is no cavil with the assertion that ascertaining
the genuineness of a dying declaration is an exercise into a

question of fact. In case titled “Ibrar Hussain and another Vs

the State” (2006 SCMR 962, _ it is held that:

“The testimony of the complainant and eye-

witnesses inspires confidence. It is noted that
-19-

on the points of time, date and place of
occurrence, the evidence led by the
prosecution is consistent and no dents were
created in the testimony of the P.Ws. Besides,
dying declaration of the deceased was also
there, which was corroborated by the
testimony of the eye-witnesses, plus medical
evidence which indicated that as many as 14
injuries were sustained by the deceased.
Above named five co-accused were acquitted
for the reason that even the prosecuting
agency was suspicious about their
involvement in this crime. The findings
recorded by trial Court and affirmed by High
Court are in accordance with the evidence
available on record and not open to any

exception. No interference is warranted.”
17. The learned counsel submits that the statement was
recorded to police during investigation, which is only and only a
statement recorded under section 161 Cr.P.C. and that the same
is not admissible in evidence, but we are not persuaded, the mere
fact of recording the statement of the deceased by the police
officer during investigation does not make it inadmissible in
evidence, as section 162(2) specially excludes dying declaration
from the restriction application. Ascertaining the veracity of a
dying declaration in any particular case is an exercise into a
question of fact and not of law. Thus, the usual aids employed by
the courts for determining the truthfulness of any statement

would all be relevant for evaluating a dying declaration. Each
-20-
and every dying declaration is liable to be scrutinized in its
attending circumstances as well as on the basis of integrity of its

maker.

18. In the present case it was the deceased then injured
who reported the matter, who was fully conscious and oriented in
time and space. The cause of death has fully been explained by
the Doctors, who appeared before the trial court as witnesses.
The attending circumstances of the case lend full support to the

statement of the deceased recorded before the police.

19. We have no hesitation in holding that the
prosecution fully succeeded in bringing home guilt against the
appellants, but we are still to travel an extra mile to ascertain as
to what should be the appropriate sentence in the given
circumstances of the case. There is no denial to the fact that
initially all the accused i.e. the convict/appellants and the co-
accused were charged for forming unlawful assembly, but the
same could not be proved on record, as the circumstances of the
case convinced, the learned trial Court in that respect. As none of
the accused has been convicted under section 148/149 P.P.C,
which confirms that on one hand the learned trial Court was not
satisfied with the evidence produced in that respect and on the

other, the role of every accused was assessed individually, as
-21-
there was a free fight between the parties. The weapon used in
the episode is another circumstance which attracts our attention
to the intention behind. While reporting the matter, the
complainant then injured attributed a blow to the
convict/appellant, Lutf-ur-Rehman, with the dull side of the
weapon, whereas to the appellant Shams-ur-Rehman an incised
wound on his scalp was attributed. The record tells that the
deceased died of the injury caused to his leg, so we deem it
essential to assess from the record as to whether the intention
was to kill. The record of the case and the statements recorded
leads us nowhere but to hold that the intention was not to kill, as
the selection of weapon and the seat of injury excludes the
eagerness to kill, so we are not impressed with the approach of
the learned trial court, on this particular aspect of the case. While
assessing the collected material we are persuaded in holding, that
the correct application of law, in case of the convict/appellant,
Lutf-ur-Rehman, would be section 315 of the Pakistan Penal
Code, 1860, and not section 302(b) P.P.C, i.e. Qatl Shibh-i-amd
which reads as follows:
“Whoever with intent to cause
harm to the body or mind of any
person causes the death of that or of

any other person by means of a

weapon or any act which in the
-~22-

ordinary course of nature is not likely
to cause death is said to commit Qatl
Shib-i-amd,”
Whereas section 316 of the Pakistan Penal Code, 1860,
describes its punishment which reads as follows:
“Whoever commits Qatl
Shib-e-Amd shall be liable to diyat and
may also be _ punished’ with
imprisonment of either description for

a term which may extend to [Twenty-

Five] years as Ta’azir.”
Resultantly, the sentence awarded under section 302(b) P.P.C to
the convict Lutf-ur-Rehman is altered to one under section 316
P.P.C, he is convicted and sentenced to five years RI alongwith

Diyat amount, to be paid to the legal heirs of the deceased.

20. Now diverting to the case of convict, Shams-ur-
Rehman, we lurk no hesitation in mind that he is only and only
responsible for the injury caused on the scalp of the deceased
and the same is punishable under section 337-A(i) P.P.C, as
such the sentence awarded under section 302(b) P.P.C is set
aside and the convict/appellant is convicted under section 337-
A(i) P.P.C to two years RI. He is further directed to pay
Rs.30,000/- as Daman to the legal heirs of the deceased, in

default thereof to further undergo one month SI.
PO
-23-
ae 21. In view of the foregoing reasons, coupled with the
fact that the instant criminal appeal No.337-B of 2019 has been
partially allowed, whereby conviction and sentence has been
modified, the instant connected Cr. A No.360-B of 2019 against
acquitted co-accused and Cr.R No.65-B of 2019 for

enhancement of sentence of appellants, are dismissed.

Announced sa
Dt: 09.02.2022 ff

*Azam/P.S*
JUDGE
JUDGE
(3B)

Mr. Justice Sahibzada Asadullah &
Mr. Justice Muhammad Naeem Anwar

Lit go?

08 APR 2022
