JUDGMENT SHEET
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
MINGORA BENCH (DAR-UL-QAZA), SWAT
(Judicial Department)
Cr.A. No. 135-M of 2014
JUDGMENT

Date of hearing: 27.09.2017

Appellant:-_ (Iftikhar) by Mr. Sher _ Muhammad

Khan, Advocate.

Respondents:- (the State & I another) by Mr. Rafiq

Ahmad, Astt: Advocate General and M/S Rashid Ali
Khan & Muhammad Pervaish Khan, Advocates.

MOHAMMAD IBRAHIM KHAN, J.- On the
basis of avouchment as taken in FIR No. 826 dated
25.12.2012 registered at Police Station Khurshid
Khan Shaheed (Khwaza Khela) District Swat
accused Iftikhar is said to have committed
qatil-i-amd of Umar Habib by firing at him which
proved effective, later died. This offence falls within
the purview of section 302 PPC. Upon recovery of
the pistol 30 bore suspected to be crime weapon was
recovered on 29.12.2012 on pointation of accused
Iftikhar. As no license or permit was shown to be
po, lawful weapon then under section 13 A.O. the
—~ offence being committed.
2s The learned Sessions Judge/Zila Qazi

Swat on its basis framed the charge against the

Nawab
Nawab

-2-

accused Iftikhar on 07.02.2013. After compliance of
the codal formalities provided necessary documents
to the accused prior to framing of the charge then
examined the witnesses whose statements were
recorded under section 164 of the Criminal
Procedure Code, thereby their names being entered
in calendar of witnesses, these are PW-1 Umar
Sadiq, PW-2 Abdur Rauf, PW-3 Nazir Ahmad, PW-
4 Mst. Shahzma, PW-5 Jehan Akbar, PW-6 Khaista
Muhammad, PW-7 Dr. Aziz-ur-Rahman, PW-8
Abdul Wakil, PW-9 Nazir Ahmad ASI, PW-10
Wagar Hassan Customer Relation Officer, PW-11
Muhammad Ayaz ASI, PW-12 Akbar Hayat CIO,
PW-13 Ajab Khan Constable, PW-14 Tariq Khan
Constable, PW-15 Rashid Ali Khan Head Constable,
PW-16 Dr. Umair Medical Officer, PW-17 Rahmat
Ali SHO/SI, PW-18 Dr. Alamgir Khan TMO and
PW-19 Naeem Shah SI. When the prosecution
evidence was over, the accused Iftikhar was
examined under section 342 Cr.P.C he was put as
many as 28 questions, he negated the same, posed
innocence and stated to have no concern with the

commission of gatil-i-amd of Umar Habib deceased.
Nawab

-3-

3. By the judgment in Sessions Case No.
03/02 of 2013 decided on 17.04.2014 the following
sentences were passed:

I) U/S 302 PPC the accused/Appellant
was convicted and sentenced to suffer
imprisonment for life and to pay Rs. 02
million (twenty lacs) as compensation
to the legal heirs of the deceased Umar
Habib which amount shall be
recoverable as arrears of Land
Revenue. The accused shall suffer six
months SI in case of non-payment of
compensation.

2) U/S 13 A.O. the accused/Appellant was
convicted to one year RI with fine of
Rs. 2,000/- in default thereof he shall
suffer further two months SI. Both the
sentences shall run concurrently.
However, benefit of section 382-B
Cr.P.C was extended to _ the

accused/Appellant.

4. We have afforded fair opportunity of
hearing to the learned counsel for the
accused/Appellant Iftikhar, learned counsel for the
complainant and learned Astt: Advocate General for
the State, with their assistance we have gone through
the entire record.

5. Learned counsel for the complainant

assisted by learned A.A.G referred to PLD 2003
Nawab

-4-

Supreme Court 704." Sh. Muhammad Amjad ys the

State", 2010 SCMR 670 "" Gul Muhammad ys the
State", 2011 SCMR 725" Niaz-ud-Din and another
vs_the State and another", PLD 2008 Supreme
Court 503_"" Muhammad Latif vs the State", 2006
SCMR_1796_" Nasir Shah vs the State", 2015
SCMR_10_" Sikandar Shah _vs Raza Shah_and
another", 2012 P Cr.LJ 588 (Peshawar) " Nadir
Shah _vs the State and others", 2010 SCMR 55"
Majeed _vs_ the State" and 2001 SCMR_ 1474 _"

Farmanullah_vs Qadeem Khan and another". In

the light of these dictums of the Hon'ble superior
Courts prayed for utter dismissal of the appeal and
acceptance of the connected criminal revision as the
accused/Appellant being fully connected with the
commission of offence entitled to be awarded capital
punishment of death.

6. By this commutual finding, we dispose of
Criminal Appeal No. 135-M of 2014 and Criminal
Revision No. 39-M of 2014 for enhancement of the
sentence particular being awarded to the Accused
Iftikhar to be enhanced from Life to Death.

Te It has been much emphasized that after the
deceased then injured Umar Habib received bullet on

his chest, he was taken to the hospital by PW-6
Nawab

-5-

Khaista Rahman, the driver by profession plying the
motorcar Ghawagai bearing No. PSKKS-760 and
when reached to the place known as Taroogai Road
Khwaza_ Khela he was already having two
passengers. He then saw a young lad lying on the
road in injured condition. All the three persons
picked the injured, placed him in the motorcar and
then took him to the hospital. This informer who has
communicated to Umar Sadiq PW-1 that his brother
is in injured condition and must rush to the hospital.
This witness has categorically stated that on the way
he has asked the then injured now deceased Umar
Habib that as to how he has received the bullet on his
body, who has replied to him that he should not be
asked as to who has fired upon him but instead he be
taken to the hospital. When evaluated this statement
it seems that Khaista Muhammad PW-6 had no
previous concern with the then injured who has used
his mobile phone to inform his brother Umar Sadiq,
but in the opening line of his cross-examination this
PW admits that his house is situated near 5/6 minutes
walking distance from the place of occurrence.
While narrating time when he has taken up the then
injured for onward transmitting him to the hospital

many persons had gathered and it was the deceased
As

Nawab

-6-

Umar Habib who told him to take him to the
hospital, meaning thereby, in the cross-examination
it has given the color that the then injured Umar
Habib and PW-6 Khaista Rahman were not known to
each other, rather during cross-examination an
admission has come up to that extent that there exist
identification between both of them as they lived
near each one houses. By this time, it cannot be
gathered that the then injured now deceased has ever
named anyone to have fired upon him which proved
effective.

8. Coming to the statement of PW-1 Umar
Sadiq, who on receiving information that his brother
has been injured, he rushed to the hospital. He has
given certain details as to how he has implicated the
accused Iftikhar by referring his mobile number. It is
very clear that he being the brother was never given
any clue of the involvement of the accused Iftikhar.
This implication by PW-1 Umar Sadiq is on account
of :-

Wb ue nt oP wha"

ful LS LA ING gh Lost LS
"nF te Moet Luri Sitwell

About the veracity of the statement of

PW-2 Abdur Rauf, who is more loyal being relative
Nawab

-7-

of the deceased Umar Habib. He has given the
information by the then injured cum deceased Umar
Habib at night time that it is the accused Iftikhar who
has fired upon him and in the morning then he
charged the accused Iftikhar. This witness has
categorically admitted that accused Iftikhar has
remained his student. During cross-examination this
witness admits like:-
SSE ee AF Ut Wier ASPs nee"
Lut Ey twe 2G but ole
"BULie

Then taken somersault, this witness has
come up with another admission in the cross-
examination that while recording the statement the
then injured in his presence deposed that the accused
Iftikhar was the one who fired upon him. The
statement of this witness is also not worth
consideration for the purpose of dying declaration.
Statement of another loyal relative is PW-3 Nazir
Ahmad, he came to know on 26.12.2012 that his
relative the then injured Umar Habib has received
some fire shot who was taken to the hospital for
treatment as he rushed there and asked the then
injured Umar Habib as to who had fired upon him,

he informed him that it was accused Iftikhar who has
por

Nawab

-8-

fired upon him and in his presence the statement
with regard to implication of the accused Iftikhar
was given by the then injured cum deceased to the
police. As this witness being the close relative was
attracted to the hospital on the 2nd day of the
happening who has chosen on account of being close
relative has given the statement that the then injured
Umar Habib had recorded statement before the
police implicating the accused Iftikhar without any
further corroboration to this effect. Thus, in the given
circumstances statement of this PW would also loose
its efficacy. While statement of PW-4 Mst. Shazma,
widow of the deceased Umar Habib is also silent
with regard to, she being conveyed that accused
Iftikhar had fired upon her husband and this fact has
been communicated to her, rather she has narrated all
altogether new story that it was accused Iftikhar who
likes her but was blatantly refused the offer for
engagement as by the time she was going to marry
the deceased Umar Habib and this offer for the first
time was extended to her in the marriage ceremony
of her aunt Mst. Nazia. In her cross-examination she
admits that she has seen the accused Iftikhar for the
first time in the marriage ceremony of her aunt Mst.

Nazia, but during her cross-examination this witness
Nawab

-9-

admitted that prior when the deceased has been
killed she remained in contact with accused Iftikhar
who often used to call her being her relative. In-fact
there were rumours that the deceased Umar Habib
and accused Iftikhar are in close relation, therefore a
suggestion has been put in this behalf though denied
by the PW-3 Nazir Ahmad close relative of the
deceased Umar Habib to the effect that grandmother
of accused Iftikhar and his grandmother are sisters
inter se. PW-4 has witnessed to the effect that her
brother-in-law Umar Sadiq and mother-in-law were
present at the time of recording their statement
before the police, but it is otherwise not corroborated
by further evidence of any statement during trial.

9. From bare perusal of the oral evidence of
these PWs, it transpires that none of the witness has
seen the occurrence. All of them have been examined
under section 164 Cr.P.C just to bring home the
charges and to implicate accused Iftikhar in the
dying declaration statement of deceased Umar
Habib. It is absolutely clear that had accused
Iftikhar been involved in the commission of firing at
the deceased Umar Habib, his name would have
been rightly placed in the First Information Report

by the deceased himself but for reasons best known
yo

Nawab

-10-

to him he kept mum even knowingly that it was the
accused Iftikhar who fired upon him, but probably
did not want disclosure of some real facts. There is
absolutely no cavil with this proposition that all these
witnesses have been closely related with the
deceased but none of them have given any clue as to
why the accused Iftikhar will kill the deceased
Umar Habib without any reason. The most
important aspect to skip-out the accused Iftikhar is
that as the occurrence took place on 25.12.2012 at
17.25 hours when the deceased could there and then
named the accused Iftikhar for the commission of
occurrence who took the life of the deceased at many
stages, the stage he was picked up by PW-6 Khaista
Muhammad, the report was lodged in the hospital
before the police, when his brother PW-1 Umar
Sadiq and mother in the company of his wife PW-4
Mst. Shazma had gone to the hospital, but even then
they did not disclose the name of real culprit to be
the accused Iftikhar. It is miraculous that when the
‘hen injured cum deceased Umar Habib remained in
his senses even after recovery from the operation if
has recorded his statement under section 161 Cr.P.C
shortly after leaving this transient world on

27.12.2012 evidence leading through CDR via hand
wer

-—

Nawab

-it-

written data collected from the Army Officials on
30.12.2012 as to how the Investigation Officer
before collecting this CDR data when has no
information that it was accused Iftikhar to have fired
upon the deceased Umar Habib could record
statement of the deceased under section 161 Cr.P.C
named herein this accused Iftikhar. This query when
put to the learned counsel for the complainant, he
was unable to reply. According to the referred
dictums reported in 2005 SCMR_1556_" Noor
Muhammad ys the State". The relevant citation (c)
speaks off:-

"Supplementary statement of complainant.
Value, Any statement or further statement
of the informant recorded during
investigation by the police being neither
equivalent to the FIR nor to be read as part
of the same, its value will be determined
keeping in view of the settled principles in
this behalf."
Likewise 2008 SCMR 1221 " Ghulam

adir_ and 2 others vs the State" has been referred

to, wherein the relevant citation (A) opines that:-

"Belated statement of witnesses. Effect.
Belated examination of a witness by police
may not be fatal to prosecution but where
delay is unexplained, accused has not been
named in FIR and circumstances justify

that open FIR and delay have purposely
—

Nawab

=12-

been maneuvered to name accused later,
such managed delay and gaps adversely
affected prosecution case."

As per wisdom contained in reported

judgment cited as 20/1 YLR 921 (Lahore) " Rifat

Hussain and another vs the State". The relevant

citation (b) reads in the following manner:-

" Supplementary statement made by the
complainant before Investigating Officer
regarding the same occurrence is neither
admissible in evidence, nor the same can be

equated with the FIR or read as its part."

10. Statements of the prosecution witnesses
would reveal that these PWs are unaware about the
information being given by the deceased Umar
Habib regarding implication of the accused Iftikhar.
These statements have been purposely maneuvered
to name this accused as to cover the gaps adversely
affecting the prosecution case.

11. We are unable to understand as to how the
statement recorded under section 161 Cr.P.C at
belated stage of the deceased Umar Habib when that
too the words being spoken from the mouth of its
author police official being Investigation Officer
when such _ statement conspicuously lack

corroboration. This statement is sole coming-out to
Nawab

-13-

be as dying declaration as obviously has no

evidentiary value. Reliance has been placed on 1984

SCMR_1092_"" Nazim Khan and 2 others vs the

State". Citation (D) reads:

"Prosecution case suffering from serious
infirmity and material on record not
capable of being relied upon. Conspicuous
lack of independent corroboration.
Accused entitled to benefit of doubt in
accordance, with principles governing safe
administration of criminal justice. "
Conviction and sentence set aside.

1978 SCMR 303_" Muhammad Yasin vs
the State has been relied upon. The relevant citation
envisages:

" Dying declaration in order to form sole
basis of conviction. Must be free from every
sort of taint and be _ independently
corroborated. Major portion of dying
declaration found false and whole recorded
during presence of deceased's relations, not
excluding possibility of deceased having
been tutored. Declaration also not
corroborated.

12. It is absolutely safe principle of
administration of criminal justice that when there
appears a dint in the prosecution evidence which
even a single infirmity, it ought to benefit an accused
facing the charges of capital punishment, but where

at every step the witnesses being named to bring
Nawab

-14-

home the charges and link the accused Iftikhar for
commission of the murder of Umar Habib. Had
Umar Habib wanted to implicate the accused Iftikhar
he remained alive from the time he was hit by bullet
and all time to remain in his senses in time and space
he could name the accused Iftikhar, but because of
maintaining secrecy and the motive behind the
occurrence he failed to name the accused Iftikhar
either before the Medical Officer who has examined
him and operated him by taking out the bullet from
his body or before the police or before anyone
especially Umar Sadiq his brother who remained
with him all the time in the hospital till the departed
soul left his body. The most drastic feature of this

case is that PW-1 Umar Sadiq admitted in his cross-

examination that Gye & AFie+ 2 #U®. If so then

when coming in so close proximity and talking to
him on phone, knowingly that it was accused Iftikhar
to have fired on him but even then remained alive for
sufficient days did not charge him either in his
statement while making report (or) even latter which
aspect would lead to an inference of high doubts.

13. Now coming to the recovery of 30 bore

pistol allegedly recovered on the pointation of
Nawab

-15-

accused/Appellant on 29.12.2012 vide recovery
memo Ex. PW-11/2 after 3 days of the occurrence
lying in the maize stripe (Gs 2S Ustit) adjacent to
private link road Taroogai. In this respect, statement
of witness to the recovery memo Muhammad Ayaz
ASI (PW-11) is contradictory in nature and not
confidence inspiring regarding recovery of pistol on
the instance of the accused/Appellant. Apart from
that, this PW in his cross-examination showed total
ignorance about the mode and manner of the
recovery and even he did not remember the distance
between the main road Taroogai and the place of
recovery of crime weapon. Thus, the statement of
such witness cannot be relied upon as to whether the
words coming out from his mouth are based on truth
or otherwise. Therefore, the testimony of this PW
would be of no help to the prosecution about
genuineness of the recovery of crime weapon.
Moreover, no empties have been recovered from the
spot so, this aspect of the case too cast serious doubts
about the veracity of stance of the prosecution that
whether this pistol has ever been used in the

commission of offence or otherwise.
er

-16-

It is settled by now that the recovery of
empties etc are always considered to be corroborative
piece of evidence and such kind of evidence by itself
is not sufficient to bring home the charges against the
accused especially when the other material put-
forward by the prosecution in respect of guilt of the
accused/Appellant has already been disbelieved. In
this respect reliance has been placed on 1993 SCMR

417_"Ashiq Hussain _ys_the State", wherein the

relevant citation (a) speaks off:-

Recovery of gun from accused after 13
days of his arrest and matching of
pieces of butt recovered from the spot
with the said gun was highly doubtful.
Accused was acquitted on benefit of

doubt in circumstances."

Similar view has further been affirmed by

the Hon'ble Supreme Court of Pakistan in case cited

as 2001 SCMR 424 " Imran Ashraf and 7 others vs

ey the State" in the following manner:-
if =

Nawab

"Recovery of incriminating articles is
used for the purpose of providing
corroboration to the ocular testimony.
Ocular evidence and _ recoveries,

therefore, are to be considered
vw

a

Nawab

-17-

simultaneously in order to reach for a
just conclusion."

14. The gist of the whole discussion is that the
prosecution case against the accused Iftikhar is
pregnant with doubts. It is settled principle of law
that in case of doubt, the benefit thereof must accrue
in favour of the accused as a matter of right and not
of grace. It was observed by the apex Court in the

case of "Tariq Pervez v. The State 1995 SCMR 1345 "that

for_giving the benefit of doubt it was not necessary

that_there should_be many circumstances creating

doubts". If there is circumstance which_created

reasonable doubt in a prudent mind about the guilt of

the accused, then the accused would be entitled to the

benefit_of doubt not_as_a_matter_of grace_and

concession but as a matter of right.

Similar citation of judgment 2008 SCMR
1221 "Ghulam Qadir_and 2 others ys the State"

Supra enunciates:-

"Benefit of doubt. Principle of
applicability. For the purpose of benefit
of doubt to an accused, more than one
infirmity is not required. Single infirmity
creating reasonable doubt in the mind of

a reasonable and prudent person
Nawab

-18-

regarding the truth of charge, makes the

whole case doubtful. "
15. In view of the above discussion, we are of
the firm view that the prosecution failed to prove its
case against the accused/Appellant beyond any
shadow of doubt; therefore, his conviction cannot be
maintained, ergo, while extending the benefit of
doubt, we accept the appeal preferred by the
convict/Appellant by setting aside his conviction and
sentence acquit him of the charges leveled against
him. He be set free forthwith, if not required in any

other case.

16. Similarly connected Criminal Revision
bearing No. 39-M of 2014 filed for enhancement of
the sentence by the complainant-party is also

dismissed having become infructuous.

These are the detailed reasons for our short

order of even date.

Announced. wee

Dt: 27.09.2017. eo

Muhammad Ibrahim Khan

