IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
PESHAWAR,

Judicial De ent

Cr.A, No.1073-P/2023

Rustam son of Gul Nawaz,
t/o Garhi Qamar Din, Peshawar.

Cr.A, No.1086-P/2023

Rooh Ullah s/o Din Akbar,
t/o Pandu road Chairman Office,

Peshawar
Appellant (s)
VERSUS
The State etc
Respondent (s)
For Appellant (s) - Mr. Muhammad Saeed Khan
Advocate and Barrister Amir Khan
Chamkani.
For State - Mr. Noman-ul-Hag Kaka Khel,
AAG.
For Respondent No.1 Malik Nasruminallah, Advocate.
Date of hearing: 08.10.2024
Date of announcement:
JUDGMENT

ISHTIAQ IBRAHIM, CJ.-Tried by learned Judge

Anti-Terrorism Court-III, Peshawar, (“Trial Court”), in case
FIR No.453 dated 08.03.2021, registered under sections
302, 324, 34 PPC and section 7 Anti-Terrorism Act, 1997, at
Police Station Faqir Abad/CTD, Peshawar (1) Rustam and
(2) Roohullah, (“appellants”), having been found guilty of
committing murder of Mubashar Ahmed (“deceased”), have
been convicted and sentenced vide judgment dated 14.06.2023
(“impugned judgment”) as under:-

Under Section 302/34 PPC:- To undergo rigorous

imprisonment for life each and to pay rupees one
lac each, as compensation to legal heirs of the
deceased in terms of section 544-A Cr.P.C. and in
default thereof to further undergo six months simple
imprisonment.
Under Section 7(1)(a) Anti-Terrorism Act, 1997:-
To undergo rigorous imprisonment for life each and
to pay rupees one lac each as fine and in default
thereof to further undergo six months simple
imprisonment each.
Under Section 324/34 PPC:- To undergo ten years
rigorous imprisonment on two counts each and to
pay rupees one lac each as fine and in default
thereof to further undergo six months simple
imprisonment each.
To undergo rigorous imprisonment for ten years
each and to pay rupees one lac each as fine and in
default thereof to further undergo six months simple
imprisonment each.

All the sentences shall run concurrently and
benefit of Section 382-B Cr.P.C. has been extended

to the appellants.

2. Through the instant and connected Cr.A, No.1086-P of
2023, the appellants have questioned their conviction and
sentences, whereas, Zia Ullah, the petitioner-complainant, has

filed connected Cr.R. No.170-P of 2023, seeking enhancement

of sentences of the respondents-convicts from life
imprisonment to normal penalty of death as provided for the

offence under section 302 PPC.
3. Since all the three matters are stemming out from the
impugned judgment of the learned trial Court, therefore, we
propose to decide the same through this single judgment.

4. The prosecution’s case as per First Information Report
(“FIR”) Exh.PA, registered on the basis of Murasila is that on
08.03.2021 at 0240 hours, complainant Zia Ullah (PW.12), in
company of friend, namely, Mubashir Ahmad (then injured), in
casualty of Lady Reading Hospital (“LRH”), Peshawar,
reported to Inayat Ullah Khan ASI (not produced) to the effect
that on 08.03.2021 he along with his friends, namely,
Mubashir Ahmad and Muhammad Haris (PW.13), late night
left Supper Market Saddar Peshawar in a Motorcar bearing
Registration No.APZ.966, being driven by injured Mubashir
Ahmad for refreshment and taking tea; that at 0210 hours,
when they reached Dalazak road City Railway Station,
Mubashir Ahmad stopped the motorcar, deboarded from it and
went at distance for attending the call of nature and after his
return when he boarded the motorcar, they told him to play
music/tape-record of the motor car. In the meantime, they
heard report of fire shots and Mubashir Ahmad told them that
the bullets of the fire shots have hit him; that no sooner he
(complainant) deboarded from the motorcar and reached
driving seat of the motorcar in the meantime two police
constables, duly armed, riding on a motorbike arrived at the
spot, who on noticing Mubashir Ahmad in injured condition

told them to immediately shift him to the hospital; that
Muhammad Haris (PW.13) immediately occupied the driving
seat of the motorcar and they shifted their injured friend to
hospital; that he has not seen anyone firing at them, but is
satisfied from the dubious movements and actions of the two
constables that they might have fired at them. Report of the
complainant was recorded in the shape of Murasila, on the
basis of which, FIR Exh.PA was registered under section 324
PPC against unknown culprit(s).

5. On 08.03.2021 at about 02.25 AM, Dr. Latifullah
(PW.16), examined injured Mubashir Ahmad aged about 20
years and found the following injuries on his person vide
Medico legal report Exh.PW.16/1:-

i. One firearm wound about 2x3 cm in size on
his right lateral aspect of chest below axilla.

ii. Firearm wound about 1x1 cm on left
anterior aspect of chest above nipple.

iii. Firearm wound about 3x4 cm on his right hip

joint, lateral aspect.

iv. Firearm wound about 1x1 cm on his pelvic
region just above root of penis.
vy. Abrasion on left thigh plus right flank.

The patient was advised X-ray pelvic, chest,
left thigh and fast scan. He was referred to CVW,
CTW, COW, CSW, urology and radiology.
Probable_duration of injuries: within 30

minutes approximately.

Kind of weapon used: firearm.
6. On the same day ie. 08.03.2021 injured Mubashir
Ahmad deceased succumbed to injuries. At 02.45 AM, Dr.
Noor ul Baqi (PW.15), conducted autopsy on the dead body of

the deceased and found the following:-
External Appearance:
As per record the deceased was hospitalized vide

Chit No.KO.2ACF21158115. Time of death of the
deceased as per police record 04.09 AM at LRH,
Peshawar. No mark of ligature on neck. A young man
with average built wearing white shalwar bloodstained
with firearm defects and blackening seen vide
postmortem report Exh.PM.

i. A firearm entry wound on right outer of chest 4x3
cm in size with metallic stapling 5 cm from axilla 9
cm from nipple.

ii. Firearm exit wound on left front of chest
3x3 cm in size. 5 cm midline. 9cm above nipple.

iii.

A surgically made wound 2x1 cm on right outer of

chest 4 cm from nipple, 7 cm from axilla.

iv. A grazing wound 4x1 cm in size on right outer of
chest, 5 cm nipple, 4 cm from axilla, metallic piece
was also recovered.

v. Firearm entry wound right outer of thigh 4x2 cm in
size with blackening around and abrasion 7 cm from
iliac spine 14 cm from midline.

vi. Firearm exit wound on left side public area 1x1 cm,
1 cm from midline, 2 cm from root of penis.

vii. Firearm re-entry inner of thigh 1x2 cm in size, 3 cm
from growing, 20 cm above knee.

viii. Firearm exit left outer of thigh 1x1 cm in

size, 13 cm from iliac spine, 12 cm from knee.

ix. An abrasion on right side thigh 2x3 cm in size, 8 cm
below iliac spine.

Thorax: Walls, ribs, cartilages, plurae, right and left

lungs injured.

Stomach and its contents: Partially filled.

Remarks:-According to his opinion the deceased died

due to injuries to the vessels of lower abdomen and
upper thigh, both lungs and associated blood vessels
due to firearm.

Probable _time between _injury__and__death:
hospitalized.
Probable time between death and postmortem: 3 to 6
hours.

7. On 13.03.2021, complainant Zia Ullah (PW.12),
recorded statement under section 164 Cr.P.C. before the
learned Judicial Magistrate, Peshawar, wherein he denied
report written down in the Murasila. His statement is
reproduced below:-
“Stated that on 08.03.2021 at night, I along with my
friends, namely, Mubashir Ahmad and Muhammad Haris,
was going in a motorcar bearing Registration
No.APZ.966, driven by Mubashir Ahmad, for taking tea
and when we reached at Dalazak road near City Railway
Station, Peshawar, Mubashir Ahmad stopped the
motorcar, deboarded from it and went for attending the
call of nature. After little time he returned and occupied
the driving seat of the motorcar, the police opened fire at
us, as a result, Mubashir Ahmad got hit and seriously
injured while we luckily remained unscathed. In the
meantime, two police constables, duly armed and greatly
perturbed came there and aimed their weapons at us.
When I opened the door of the motorcar, my friend
Mubashir Ahmad, fell on the ground from the driving
seat. The two constables told us to shift our injured friend
to hospital; that out of the two constables, one having
beard, called someone on his cell phone and stated
conversation with him. We put the injured in the
motorcar and shifted him to hospital. After sometimes,

SHO Police Station Faqir Abad Peshawar along with
other police officials reached hospital. I narrated the

occurrence to him but he ignored my version and started

pressurizing us to hand over him the ICE and arms

allegedly in our possession. The SHO also threatened us.

We were already frightened due to the incident. The SHO

then obtained my signature on a paper written by he

himself. After sometime, the injured succumbed to

injures. I charge the two constables, namely, Roohullah

and Rustam for committing murder of Mubashir Ahmad

deceased and firing at us. This is my statement”.
8. Similarly, on 09.04.2021, Muhammad Haris, recorded
statement under section 164 Cr.P.C. before the learned Judicial
Magistrate-IV, Peshawar, wherein he too while narrating the
same story as advanced by the complainant charged both the
appellants-constables for murder of the deceased and
ineffective firing at them.
9. Shafi Ullah Khan DSP (PW.18), conducted investigation
in the case, who on receipt of copy of FIR, proceeded to the
spot and prepared site plan Exh.PB at his own observation.
During spot inspection, he secured blood through cotton
Exh.P.2 from the place of the deceased and one empty of 7.62
bore Exh.P.3, vide recovery memo Exh.PW.9/1. On
08.03.2021, he took into possession one DVR Exh.P.8 from
Taj Mahal Students Hostel, vide recovery memo Exh.PW.9/3.
He also took into possession the last worn bloodstained

garments of the deceased vide recovery memo Exh.PW.9/2.
Vide recovery memo Exh.PW.6/1 he took into possession
motorcar bearing registration No.APZ.966 Exh.P.1 of the
. deceased. Vide recovery memo Exh.PW.11/2 he took into
possession a .30 bore pistol Exh.PX belonging to constable
Roohullah (appellant) and one SMG official rifle Exh.PX/1
bearing No.56-29012724 along with loaded magazine
containing 23 live round Exh.PX/2 belonging to constable
Rustam (appellant), produced by Ameer Dad Khan (PW.7)
Moharrir of Police Station. Vide recovery memo Exh,.PW.11/1
he took into possession a motorcycle of the appellants bearing
registration No.3760-KPK Exh.PX/3. He draw photographs of
the motorcar Exh.PW.18/1 (four in number). The appellants
were arrested by the SHO and handed over to Shafi Ullah
Khan DSP (PW.18), who obtained their physical remand from
the court of learned Judicial Magistrate, interrogated them and
recorded their statements under section 161 Cr.P.C. He also
obtained CDR of mobile numbers of the deceased as well as
the accused Exh.PW.8/1. On 13.03.2021 he applied for
identification parade of the appellants which was allowed and
their identification parade was conducted. On 10.03.2021 he
inserted section 7 ATA in the case, sent the blood and urine
obtained from the appellants to KMC Peshawar for the purpose
intoxication analysis, reports whereof are Exh.PL and
Exh.PL/1. He also sent the bloodstained articles as well as
empties, weapons of the appellants and the motorcar to the

FSL. On 11.03.2021 he took into possession two spent bullets,
one recovered from the body of the deceased during
postmortem examination and another recovered from bonnet of
the motorcar, vide recovery memo Exh.PW.9/4. He placed on
file FSL reports which are Exh.PZ, Exh.PZ, Exh.PZ/2 and
Exh.PZ/3, recorded statements of the PWs under section 161
Cr.P.C. and thereafter handed over case file to Qeemat Gul
Khan Inspector (PW.14) Police Station CTD Peshawar. On
receipt of investigation, Qeemat Gul Khan Inspector (PW.14),
placed on file extract of Register No.19 and 21 of PS Faqir
Abad. Vide application Exh.PW.14/1 he applied for obtaining
CDR data of mobile numbers of the complainant party,
produced PW Muhammad Haris for recording his statement
under section 164 Cr.P.C. before the learned Judicial
Magistrate. Vide recovery memo Exh.PW.3/1 he took into
possession USB regarding video recording of the place of
occurrence, recorded statements of the PWs under section 161
Cr.P.C. and after completion of investigation handed over case
file to Noorullah Khan SHO (PW.1), who submitted complete
challan against the appellants before the learned trial Court.

10. On receipt of challan by the learned Trial Court, the
appellants were summoned and formally charge sheeted under
sections 302, 324 and 34 PPC, sections 7(1)(a), 7(1)(b) Anti-
Terrorism Act, 1997 and section 15 Khyber Pakhtunkhwa
Arms Act, 2013. To prove guilt of the appellants, the
prosecution examined as many as twenty (20) witnesses. After

closure of the prosecution’s evidence, statements of the
10

appellants were recorded under section 342 Cr.P.C. wherein
they denied the prosecution’s allegation and professed their
innocence. They, however, neither wished to be examined on
oath under section 340(2) Cr.P.C. nor opted to produce
evidence in defence. On conclusion of trial, the learned trial
court, after hearing both the sides, convicted and sentenced the
appellants as mentioned in the initial paragraph of the
judgment, hence, these appeals and revision petition.

11. We have heard the exhaustive arguments of learned
counsel for the parties and perused the record and evidence
with their valuable assistance.

12. We would like to first determine the applicability of the
offences of the Anti-Terrorism Act, 1997 keeping in view the
facts and circumstances of the case as well as evidence led by
the prosecution and legal position of trial of the appellants
conducted by the Anti-Terrorism Court which culminated into
the conviction of the appellants under the penal provisions of
the Special law i.e. the Anti-Terrorism Act 1997 as well as
general law under sections 302(b) and 324 PPC as it was the
first argument of learned counsel for the appellants that the
essential ingredients to bring the occurrence within the ambit
of sections 6 and 7 of the Anti-Terrorism Act, 1997, are
missing. After going through the record from cover to cover
and scrutinizing the evidence of prosecution, we are firm in
our view to hold that from the very inception of the case till

final conclusion of trial, the prosecution’s evidence is
11

completely silent with regard to motive behind the occurrence.
An iota of evidence has not been brought on record by the
prosecution to bring the instant case within the meaning of
section 6 of the Anti-Terrorism Act, 1997 (“Act of 1997”),
which for the sake of convenience is reproduced below:-

“S.6.Terrorism(1) In this Act, “terrorism” means

the use or threat of action where:-

(a) The action falls within the meaning of sub-
section (2) and

(b) The use or threat is designed to coerce and
intimidate or overawe the Government or the
public or a section of the public or community
or sect or a foreign government or population
or an international organization or create a
sense of fear or insecurity in society; or

(c) The use of threat is made for the purpose of
advancing a religious, sectarian or ethnic
cause or intimidating and terrorizing the
public, social sectors, media persons, business
community or attacking the civilians,
including damaging property to ransacking,
looting, arson or by any other means,
government officials, installation security

forces or law enforcement agencies.

This court in its authoritative judgment in case titled,
“Jumaraz Vs the State” (2021 YLR Peshawar, 955), has
held that “the issue of applicability of section 6 of the Act of
1997 to a particular case has remained a debated topic before
the august Supreme Court of Pakistan as well as the High
Courts of the country and the view which has persistently been
taken in this regard is that all the acts mentioned in sub-section
(2) of Section 6 of the Act, if committed with design/motive to

intimidate the government, public or a segment of the society,
12

or the evidence collected by prosecution suggests that the
aforesaid aim is either achieved or otherwise appears as a
by-product of the said terrorist activities, are to be dealt with
by the special Courts established under the Act of 1997. The
the test to determine whether a particular act is terrorism or not
is the motivation, object, design and purpose behind the act
and not the consequential effect created by such act”. In the
present case, the allegation against the appellants is that they
being police officials during their duty timing fired at the
complainant party without any motive and as a result of their
firing, the deceased got hit and succumbed to injuries. No
doubt a young boy/student of 20 years has been done to death
for which the appellants are charged, but it is persistent view of
the august Supreme Court of Pakistan that mere gravity or
brutal nature of an offence would not provide a valid yardstick
for bringing the same within the meaning of terrorism. This
view was re-affirmed by the larger Bench of the august
Supreme Court of Pakistan in a judgment rendered in case
titled Ghulam Hussain and others Vs. The State and others
reported as PLD 2020 Supreme Court 61, and finally it was

concluded in the said judgment that:

For what has been discussed above it is
concluded and declared that for an action
or threat of action to be accepted as
terrorism within the meanings of section 6
of the Anti-Terrorism Act, 1997 the action
must fall in subsection (2) of section 6 of

the said Act and the use or threat of such
13

action must be designed to achieve any of
the objectives specified in clause (b) of
subsection (1) of section 6 of that Act or
the use or threat of such action must be to
achieve any of the purposes mentioned in
clause (c) of subsection (1) of section 6 of
that Act. It is clarified that any action
constituting an offence, howsoever grave,
shocking, brutal, gruesome or horrifying,
does not qualify to be termed as terrorism
if it is not committed with the design or
purpose specified or mentioned in clauses
(b) or (c) of subsection (1) of section 6 of
the said Act. It is further clarified that the
actions specified in subsection (2) of
section 6 of that Act do not qualify to be
labeled or characterized as terrorism if
such actions are taken in furtherance of

personal enmity or private vendetta.

The occurrence in the present case do not qualify the essential
ingredients of section 6 punishable u/s 7 of the Act of 1997.
This Court, after scanning the entire evidence and material
available on record, has come to the conclusion that Section
7 of the Act of 1997 is not applicable to the present case in
light of the judgment of the larger bench in Ghulam Hussain’s
case supra.

13. The next legal point for determination is that what
would be the fate of the case when otherwise the appellants are
found guilty of the offences under sections 302, 324 and 34
PPC and whether their conviction under penal sections of the
Pakistan Penal Code can be maintained or not? if this court

arrives at the conclusion that the prosecution has proved their
14

guilt. It may be noted that the Anti-Terrorism Court, after
taking cognizance of a non-scheduled offence, is vested with
powers u/s 23 of the Act of 1997 to transfer the case to a Court
having jurisdiction. For ready reference the said provision is

reproduced below:

23. Power to transfer cases to regular
Courts. Where after taking cognizance of
an offence, an Anti Terrorism Court is of
opinion that the offence is not a scheduled
offence, it shall, notwithstanding that it has
no jurisdiction to try such offence, transfer
the case for trial of such offence to any
court having jurisdiction under the Code,
and the Court to which the case is
transferred may proceed with the trial of the
offence as if it had taken cognizance of the

offence.

This Court exercises its jurisdiction in the instant case as an
Appeal Court u/s 25 of the Act of 1997 read with section 410,
Cr.P.C and it is an admitted legal position that appeal is
continuation of the trial. The powers of this Court as Appellate
Court whether u/s 25 of the Act of 1997 or under section 410,
Cr.P.C, are regulated by section 423, Cr.P.C which confers
vast powers on the Appeal Court regarding reversal, alteration,
reduction or changing the nature of the sentence awarded to a
convict by trial Court. The above provisions of law is

reproduced below for ready reference.

423. Powers of Appellate Court in
disposing of appeal.--(1) The Appellate
Court shall then send for the record of the

case, if such record is not already in Court.
15

After perusing such record, and hearing the
appellant or his pleader, if he appears, and
the Public Prosecutor, if he appears, and, in
case of an appeal under Section 411-A, sub-
section (2) or Section 417, the accused, if
he appears, the Court may, if it considers
that there is no sufficient ground for

interfering dismiss the appeal, or may —

(a) in an appeal from an order of acquittal,
reverse such order and direct that
further inquiry be made, or that the
accused be retried or sent for trial to
the Court of Session or the High Court,
as the case may be, or find him guilty
and pass sentence on him according to

law;

(b) in an appeal from a conviction, (1)
reverse the finding and sentence and
acquit or discharge the accused, or
order him to be retried by a Court of
competent jurisdiction subordinate to
such Appellate Court or sent for trial,
or (2) alter the finding, maintaining
the sentence, or, with or without
altering the finding, reduce_ the
sentence, or, (3) with or without such

reduction and with or without

altering the finding, alter the nature
of the sentence, but, subject to the

provisions of Section 106, sub-section
(3), not so as to enhance the same;

(c) in an appeal from any other order, alter
or reverse such order;

(d) make any amendment or any
consequential or incidental order that
may be just or proper.

(Emphases supplied)
Admittedly, the appellants/convicts have been afforded fair

and proper opportunity of cross-examination of the PWs. They
16

have also been examined u/s 342 Cr.P.C. We do not see any
illegality or even an irregularity in the entire proceedings
conducted by learned trial Court. Similarly, no prejudice would
be caused to the appellants if this court decides their appeal to
the extent of the provisions of the general law. In this view of
the matter, this Court while exercising powers u/s 25 ATA or
410, Cr.P.C read with section 423, Cr.P.C, deem it appropriate
to look into the conviction and sentences of the appellants,
recorded by trial Court under the general law instead of
remanding the case to the Court of Sessions for deciding the
case in exercise of its ordinary criminal jurisdiction on the
basis of evidence recorded by Special Court. If this court is
convinced with regard to conviction of the appellants and no
illegality or material irregularity is noticed on the face of
record to vitiate the trial, in that eventuality this Court can
exercise its jurisdiction to set aside the conviction under one
head by maintaining the conviction and sentence under the
other head, subject to appraisal of evidence. Reliance in this
regard can be placed on the judgment of the august Supreme
Court of Pakistan in the case of Waris Ali and 5 others Vs.
The State (2017 SCMR_ 1572) wherein the appellants were
initially charged u/s 302/324/452/436 P.P.C read with section
148 & 149, P.P.C whereas sections 6 and 7 (a) of the Act were
subsequently inserted in the case. The trial Court in the
mentioned case, inter alia, awarded death sentences to the

appellants u/s 7(a) ATA which was confirmed by the Lahore
17

High Court in appeals. The august Supreme Court of Pakistan,
after hearing appeal of the convicts, set-aside their conviction
u/s section 7(a) of the Act of 1997 by converting the same to
one under section 302(b), P.P.C and reduced their sentences
from death to life imprisonment in view of the facts and
circumstances of the case. Relevant portion of the judgment is

as under:

31. Accordingly, the conviction of the
appellants under section 7(a) of the Special
Act, is set aside and the same is converted
to one under section 302(b), P.P.C.
however, keeping in view the peculiar
circumstances of the case, this Court is
influenced by caution and for securing the
ends of justice in the matter of sentence
because all was not well with the
complainant and the Prosecution, the
possibility that innocent persons amongst
the guilty one were also involved, could
not be altogether ruled out, thus, the death
sentences awarded to all the appellants are
reduced to life imprisonment on the counts
mentioned in the impugned judgment but
under section 302(b), P.P.C. and the
conviction and sentences awarded to them
under section 6 read with section 7 of the

Special Act are set aside.

14. In view of what has been discussed above, conviction
and sentences of both the appellants under sections 7(1)(a) and
7(1)(b) of the Act of 1997 are hereby set-aside and the appeals
are being decided on merit to the extent of conviction and
sentences of the appellants recorded under sections 302, 324

and 34 PPC.
18

15. | Record depicts that Mubashir Ahmad deceased aged
about 20 years, was the permanent resident of village Qamar
Kalay District Bannu. Complainant Zia Ullah (PW.12) aged
about 17/18 years is also the resident of the same village and
the deceased was his maternal cousin. PW Muhammad Haris
aged about 20/21 years is the resident of District Mardan and
was the friend and class fellow of Mubashir Ahmad deceased.
The deceased and PW Muhammad Haris being students and
friends were temporarily residing in Super Market Peshawar,
whereas, complainant Zia Ullah had visited Peshawar to meet
the deceased (his cousin). The appellants are police
constables/officials and on the day of occurrence, they were
posted in Police Station Faqir Abad Peshawar. Keeping in
view ages of the deceased and eyewitnesses coupled with the
fact that their opponents/appellants are police officials, the
yardstick for assessing and evaluating the evidence cannot be
the same which is to be applied in cases of murder(s) where
private accused are charged. We say this because of the
lethargic and disinterested conducted of the prosecution in
preserving the evidence during investigation. In this regard we
will refer to order dated 08.04.2021 of the learned trial court,
which is reproduced blow:-

“Learned APP for the State accompanied by
Inspector/Investigation Officer Qeemat Gul Khan of
CTD PS Peshawar present. The IO submitted
application seeking extension in time for submission
of challan on the ground that FSL opinion in the case

is yet to be obtained.
19

Perusal of record disclose that material
evidence in the case is examination of motorcar
through expert to determine the kind of fire shots
available on it. There is letter dated 10 March, 2021
of worthy SSP investigation Peshawar addressed to
DSP (Investigation) Peshawar to carryout
examination of the motorcar through expert in FSL
formulating four questions for replies of him. Though
the investigation officer when questioned as to
whether the motorcar has been taken to FSL and
examined by the expert, he orally stated that previous
investigation officer in the case has carried out the
said exercise but nowhere on record case diary is

available to this effect. The material evidence of the

case_is_in danger of spoiling if this attitude is
allowed. Neither the investigation officer of police
Station Faqir Abad nor after transfer of the case
for investigation to CTD, the investigation Officer
present_in_ the court bother to secure this

important evidence on record.
In view of the aforesaid, it would be in fitness

of the matter to hand over this case file to learned
Prosecutor with direction to forward the same to
worthy SSP investigation CTD, Peshawar to ensure
examination of motorcar through FSL expert as per
queries contained in letter of worthy SSP
investigation Peshawar referred above and ensure
collection of expert opinion in the case soon after
examination so that challan for trial in the case is
submitted which is held up on this single point. (Bold
and underlines supplied emphasis).

The conduct of the police/Investigating Agency is quite
manifest from the order (supra). Yet there is another aspect
raising suspicion on the role of police played in the instant
case. The Murasila has allegedly been shown to have been
written down by Inayat Ullah ASI on the narration of complainant

Zia Ullah duly verified by PW Muhammad Haris but both the
20

above named witnesses in their statements under section 164
Cr.P.C. and court statements, have totally denied the said
document. As per their statements, after the occurrence, SHO
Police Station Fagir Abad reached the hospital, pressurized
them and forcibly obtained their signature on a document
written by he himself. The version of complainant and PW
Muhammad Haris got support from the fact that Inayat Ullah
ASI, the alleged author of the Murasila has not been produced
in the witness box during trial so as to prove the scribing of
Murasila on the report of the complainant. This aspect strongly
suggest that the police had strong apprehension that if Inayat
Ullah ASI is produced, he might not disclose the true facts.

16. The ocular account of the unfortunate tragedy of murder
of Mubashir Ahmad deceased, a young student of 20 years, has
been furnished by complainant Zia Ullah and Muhammad
Haris. The former while appearing in the witness box as
PW.12, has deposed as below-

“Deceased Mubashir was my maternal cousin while
Muhammad Haris is my friend and class fellow of the
deceased. On the day of occurrence i.e. 08.03.2021 I
along with Mubashir and Muhammad Haris went out
of Super Market Saddar at about in between 12.00 and
1.00 AM (night time) for taking Quetta tea in our
motorcar bearing registration No.APZ.966 driven by
deceased Mubashir and when reached on Dalazak
road, the deceased Mubashir stopped the car and
deboarded from it for the call of nature and when he
came back to the car, in the meanwhile, accused facing
trail came and started firing at us, as a result of which
the deceased Mubashir got hit and injured. After

receiving injury, I opened the door of the car for
21

deceased Mubashir when in the meanwhile, the
accused came near us and aimed their weapons on us.
After seeing the deceased Mubashir in injured
condition they directed us to take him to hospital for
treatment and we are following you to the hospital.
PW Haris has occupied the driving seat and
accordingly we proceeded to the hospital. When we
reached to the hospital, the SHO and other police
contingents also reached there and I narrated the whole
facts to him to record my report but instead he
pressurized us and told us that you were in possession
of pistols and ICE and also fired at the police party and
directed us to hand over the pistol and ice to the SHO.
Then on an already written paper they forcibly
obtained my signature as well as signature of PW
Haris on the said document. After death of the
deceased Mubashir the police took me to the spot in
their vehicle while PW Haris was taken to Police
Station along with our vehicle. I pointed out the place
of occurrence and the articles lying there and at my
instance the site plan was prepared. In the morning
when the relative and other our co-villagers came, then
we came to know that FIR was wrongly registered on
facts, hence, we protested but we were assured by the
high up of the police that we might take our dead body
for burial and thereafter the facts will be corrected
accordingly. When we came back after the burial and
funeral proceedings of the deceased, I recorded the
actual facts to the police in my statement under section
161 Cr.P.C. and before the court under section 164
CrP.C. I have also identified the accused facing trial
in the central Jail before Magistrate. After transfer of
investigation to CTD Police Station, I also handed
over to the 1.0. the USB containing CCTV recording
installed at Taj Mehal Hostel which the I.O. took into
possession vide recovery memo Exh.PW.3/1. I charge
the accused for murder of the deceased and attempt at

our lives”.
22

16. Perusal of statement of the complainant would reveal
that he has furnished minute details of each and every aspect of
the occurrence. He has well explained the purpose of his
presence with the deceased at the time of occurrence. The
argument of learned counsel for the appellants to the effect that
as per statement of Dr. Latifullah (PW.16), the deceased then
injured was well oriented in time and space at the time of
examination, but he has not reported the occurrence which
create serious doubt in the prosecution’s case is not tenable, for
the reason that when the signatures of the eyewitnesses were
obtained by force by the SHO PS Fagir Abad on a self-written
report so as to save the skin of police constables/appellants,
then it is quite understandable to a prudent mind that the SHO
present in the hospital was not so idiot to record report of the
deceased then injured so that it may be used as a dying
declaration during trial. The complainant has been subjected to
lengthy cross-examination by the defence on each and every
aspect of the incident but he remained stuck to his stance as set
forth by him in his statement under section 164 Cr.P.C. No
doubt, his statement u/s 164 Cr.P.C. has been recorded on
13.03.2021 after five days of the occurrence, but such delay
would not damage the prosecution’s case for the reason that he
and the deceased were the residents of District Bannu. After
the occurrence, the dead body of the deceased was shifted to
Bannu where the complainant would have remained busy in

the Fatiha ceremony of the deceased for such period. Besides,
23

charging the appellants directly in his statement under section
164 Cr.P.C, the complainant has also identified them during
identification parade conducted by learned Judicial Magistrate,
on 15.03.2021 inside jail premises. The defence in the cross-
examination of the complainant itself has admitted presence of
the appellants on the spot at the time of occurrence by putting
the following suggestions to him “Jt is further incorrect to
suggest that the accused facing trial Roohullah had
accompanied the deceased then injured to the hospital. It is
further incorrect to suggest that accused Roohullah has only
been charged on bald suspicion for having been on duty at
the fateful night in the company of the co-accused. The
deceased was paternal cousin of the complainant and an iota of
evidence has not been brought on record by the defence so as
to remotely suggest false implication of the appellants by him.
We are of the unanimous view that due to close relation of
complainant with the deceased, he was in fact not likely to let
off the actual perpetrators of the offence by falsely implicating
the appellants, against whom he admittedly had no previous
malice, ill-will, animosity or grudge. It is by now well settled
law that substitution of real culprits especially in cases where
the eye witnesses lost their kith and kin before their own eyes
is a rare phenomenon. Reliance is placed on the cases of
“Asfandiyar vs. The State and other” (2021 SCMR 2009)
and “Muhammad Abbas & another vs. The State” (2023

SCMR 487).
24

18. Another eyewitness of the occurrence is Muhammad
Haris. He is resident of District Mardan and not related to the
deceased except that the deceased was his friend and they both
were temporarily residing in Super Market Peshawar. He while
appearing as PW.13 in the witness box has deposed as below:-

“Deceased Mubashir was my friend/class fellow. On
the night of occurrence, I along with deceased
Mubashir and PW Zia Ullah left Super Market Saddar
in motorcar bearing registration No.APZ.966 for
taking Quetta Tea and when we reached at Dalazak
road. The deceased Mubashir who was driving the car
stopped the car and deboarded for the call of nature
and thereafter when he came back to the car and sat on
driving seat of the car, in the meanwhile, the accused
started firing upon us due to which deceased Mubashir
got hit and injured, in the meanwhile, the accused
reached the car and the complainant Zia Ullah opened
the door of the car and found the deceased Mubashir in
injured condition. In the meanwhile, one of the
accused made a telephonic call to someone and
directed us to take the injured to hospital for treatment
and they will follow us. After reaching the hospital,
the SHO along with other police officials also arrived
there and SHO asked us to hand over the ICE and
pistols to him and also made dire threats. On this the
SHO took us to our car and he reached the car
however, nothing was recovered by him. Thereafter
the SHO obtained our signatures on a document
already written by him. The deceased Musbahsir died
later on in the hospital. The complainant Zia Ullah was
taken to the spot by police while I was taken along
with the car to Police Station. After coming back to the
complainant to the Police Station with the police, the
police scribed the FIR themselves and got signed it
from us in the police Station but we agitated that it was
wrong FIR. Then I along with complainant went to the

native village of the deceased for attending the funeral
25

ceremony. I have also identified the accused facing
trial before the Magistrate. I have recorded statement
to the ILO. as well as before the Magistrate in this

regard.”

19. PW Muhammad Haris has also been subjected to
lengthy cross-examination but nothing favourable to defence
or adverse to prosecution could be extracted from his mouth.
He also remained stuck to his stance and fully corroborated the
complainant on each and every material aspect of the
occurrence such as the day, date, time and place of occurrence
as well as the mode and manner in which the incident took
place. He is also unanimous with the complainant on the
events as to how the deceased then injured was shifted from
the spot to the hospital. This PW too has identified the
appellants during identification parade conducted by the
learned Judicial Magistrate, namely, Muhammad Latif Shah
(PW.17), who while appearing in the witness box has deposed
that during identification parade both the eyewitnesses have
correctly identified the appellants.

20. Shafi Ullah Khan DSP, the Investigating Officer, has
been examined as PW.18. He has stated that he got verified the
site plan Exh.PB from the eyewitnesses. Though it has been
brought from him in cross-examination by the defence that
Super Market Peshawar consists of many shops, but this would
not advance the prosecution’s case because the deceased and

eyewitnesses were students and young boys living in hostel
26

and as a general practice students putting up in the hostels go
outside late at night for refreshment.

21. In the site plan Exh.PB, the deceased is shown inside the
motorcar on driving seat. Appellant Rustam is shown at point
No.4 (on right side of the motorcar) while appellant Rooh
Ullah is shown at point No.5 (behind the motorcar of the
deceased) at the time of occurrence. From point No.C i.e. place
behind point No.4 (place of appellant Rustam) one empty of
7.62 bore has been shown recovered by the 1.0. during spot
inspection, whereas, no empty has been shown recovered from
or near the place of appellant Roohullah. From point-D
recovery of official motorcycle of the appellants-constables
has been shown which as per site plan was being riding by
appellant Roohullah. The motorcar Exh.P.1 of the deceased
has been shown recovered from the spot vide recovery memo
Exh.Pw.6/1 by the I.0. The photographs of the motorcar are
available on file having bullet markets on its right side i.e.
driver’s side. As per medical evidence furnished by
Dr. Latifullah and Noor ul Bagi (PW.15), the deceased has
sustained all the firearm entrance wounds on his right side, and
as per site plan Exh.PB right side of the appellant falls within
the firing range of appellant Rustam at point No.4. Ameer Dad
Khan Moharrir Police Station Faqir Abad (PW.7) deposed that
on 08.03.2021, he produced .30 bore pistol Exh.PZ, belonging
to appellant Roohullah and one SMG official rifle bearing

No.56-29012724 along with loaded magazine containing 23
27

live rounds of 7.62 bore Exh.PX/1 and Exh.PX/2 belonging to
appellant Rustam to the I.O. which were taken into possession
vide recovery memo Exh.PW.11/2. The I.O. has sent the SMG
official rifle along with empty of 7.62 recovered from the place
of appellant Rustam to the FSL, report whereof Exh.PZ/1
reveals that the empty of 7.62 bore has been fired from 7.62
mm bore (SMG) rifle. The pistol of appellant Rooh ullah was
also sent to the FSL and report of the FSL says that “presence
of gun powder residue in the barrel of 30 bore pistol in
question revealed that fire has been made through it,
however, no opinion can be expressed as to when it was last
fired. The pistol is in proper working order in its present
condition”. Motorcar bearing registration No.APZ.966 of the
deceased was also sent to the FSL, report whereof Exh.PZ
shows that the holes present on its right side, head light and
_ left front door were caused due to firing. The bloodstained last
worn garments of the deceased and blood secured from the
spot from the place of the deceased were also sent to the FSL
and in this regard Serologist report Exh.PZ/3 reveals that it
was human blood and of the same group. All these strong
circumstantial pieces of evidence fully corroborate the ocular
account of the eyewitnesses, but at the same time draw a clear
line of distinction between the roles of the two appellants. As
stated earlier appellant Rustam is shown at point No.4 which is
on right side of the deceased. The bullet marks are also visible

on right side of the motorcar in the photographs. The crime
28

empty recovered from the place of appellant Rustam matches
with the SMG rifle, an official weapon allotted to him for his
duty. Blood and urine of the appellant Rustam was also
obtained by the I.O. and sent to KMC Peshawar, for analysis of
intoxication. Report in this regard Exh.P.2 is in positive,
meaning thereby that at the time of occurrence appellant
Rustam was intoxicated. Report with regard to urine and blood
of appellant Rooh ullah for the purpose of intoxication is in
negative. In view of the above discussed evidence, we are
convinced to hold that appellant Rustam is the actual
perpetrator. There is no bullet mark on the motorcar of the
deceased from back side where presence of appellant Rooh
Ullah is shown in the site plan at the time of occurrence.
Similarly, the deceased has also not received any injury from
back side.

22. Medical evidence furnished by Dr. Latifullah (PW.16)
and Noor ul Baqi (PW.15), also supports the prosecution’s
case. As per opinion of PW.15 who conducted autopsy on the
dead body of the deceased, the deceased met his unnatural
death due to firearm injuries to various parts of his body on
right side. So far as blackening on the shalwar as noticed by
the medical Officer is concerned, on one hand, in the site plan
Exh.PB the distance between point No.4 (place of appellant
Rustam) and point No.3 (place of deceased) is shown as four
feet. Appellant Rustam was in possession of SMG rifle at the

time of occurrence. Thus keeping in view length of the SMG
af

29

rifle as well as stretching of hands by appellant Rustam at the
time of firing, there is strong possibility of blackening over the
shirt of the deceased. Even otherwise, in case titled, “Aman
Ullah and another vs the State and others” (2023 SCMR
723) it has been held by the Hon’ble Apex Court that where
ocular evidence is found trustworthy and confidence inspiring,
the same is given preference over medical evidence and the
same alone is sufficient to sustain conviction of an accused.
Relevant part of the judgment is reproduced below:-

“It is settled law that where ocular evidence is

found trustworthy and confidence inspiring, the

same is given preference over medical evidence

and the same alone is sufficient to sustain

conviction of an accused. Reliance is placed on

Muhammad Igbal_Vs the State (1996 SCMR

908), Naeem Akhtar Vs the State (PLD 2003

SC _ 396), Faisal Mehmood Vs the State (2010

SCMR_1025) and Muhamamd_Ilyas_vs_the

State (2011 SCMR 460).”
23. On reassessment of the evidence available on record, we
have arrived at an irresistible conclusion that prosecution has
proved murder of the deceased by appellant Rustam through
cogent and confidence inspiring direct evidence corroborated

by strong circumstantial evidence and supported by medical

evidence.
24. As regards case of appellant Rooh Ullah, available

evidence proves that he was present with appellant Rustam at
30

the time of occurrence as is shown in the site plan Exh.PB at
back of motorcar of the deceased. However, as medico legal
report Exh.PW.16/1 and autopsy report Exh.PM, the deceased
has not sustained any injury/entrance wound on his back. No
bullet marks have been noticed on back of the motorcar.
Similarly, no empty has been shown recovered from the place
assigned to appellant Rooh Ullah. The pistol shown recovered
from appellant Rooh Ullah has been sent to the FSL, report
whereof shows that from the residue powder found in the
pistol, no opinion can be given as to when fire was made from
it lastly. Besides, one of the eyewitnesses, namely,
Muhammad Haris in his cross-examination has stated that
appellant Rooh Ullah accompanied them from the spot to the
hospital when the deceased then injured was being shifted. By
considering the overall facts and circumstances referred above,
we are of the considered view that the prosecution has not
proved guilt of appellant Rooh Ullah to the extent of
commission of murder of the deceased. An iota of evidence
has also not been led by the prosecution to prove sharing of
common intention of appellant Rooh Ullah with appellant
Rustam in committing murder of the deceased. However, the
fact of presence of appellant Rooh Ullah with appellant
Rustam at the time of occurrence has been established by the
prosecution through cogent evidence beyond shadow of
reasonable doubt. Appellant Rooh ullah, being police official

and on his duty at the relevant time, was legally bound to give
31

information of the offence to the police but he kept mum,
therefore, his role amounts to intentional omission to give
information of the offence, thus he has committed an offence
punishable under section 202 PPC, which for the sake of
convenience and ready reference is reproduced below:-

“8.202. Intentional omission to give information of

offence by person bound to inform:- Whoever, knowing

or having reason to believe that an offence has been
committed, intentionally omits to give any information

respecting that offence which he is legally bound to give

shall_be_ punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to six months
or with fine, or with both”.

25. Admittedly, no motive has been advanced by the
eyewitnesses behind the occurrence. The peculiar facts and
circumstances as are manifest from the evidence on record, it
is quite possible that there was some sudden provocation
between appellant Rustam and the deceased, which resulted
into the present unfortunate incident. It is well settled
proposition of law that in the absence of premeditation to
commit murder where motive is not proved by the prosecution,
the same may be considered as the mitigating factor in order to
reduce the quantum of sentence in cases involving capital
punishment. In the case reported as Iftikhar Mehmood and

another versus Qaiser Iftikhar_and_ others (2011 SCMR
1165), it has been ordained:-
32

“We agree with the prosecution that
motive is not sine qua non for the proof
of commission of the crime and at time
motive is not known to any other person
other than the deceased or the accused
person which never surfaced on the
record. However it cannot be denied that
motive is always very relevant to
determine the quantum of sentence that
might be awarded to a person against
whom charge of murder is proved.”

In the case reported as Zeeshan_Afzal alias Shani and another

versus The State and others (2013 SCMR 1602), this Court

has held that:

“If motive is not alleged or is not
proved, normally the sentence of death is
converted into imprisonment for life.”

This view is also fortified in the case reported as Muhammad

Yasin_and_another_versus_The State and others (2024
SCMR 128).

26. For what has been discussed above, the prosecution has

proved murder of Mubashir Ahmad deceased, a young boy of
20 years, as well as attempting at the lives of the eyewitnesses
against appellant Rustam. In this view of the matter, the
learned trial Court while appreciating the evidence in its true
perspective has rightly held appellant Rustam guilty of the
offences under sections 302(b) and 324 PPC, to which no

exception can be taken. The sentence of rigorous imprisonment
33

for life awarded to appellant Rustm being just and in
accordance with law does not warrant any interference by this
court. Accordingly, conviction and sentences of appellant
Rustam under sections 302 and 324 PPC, recorded by the
learned trial Court through the impugned judgment, are
maintained and resultantly, his appeal is hereby dismissed. The
sentences of appellant Rustam shall run concurrent and benefit
of Section 382-B Cr.P.C. is extended to him.

27. In view of the evidence discussed above, Cr.A.
No.1086-P/2023, filed by appellant Rooh Ullah is disposed of
in the manner, that his conviction and sentences under sections
302 and 324 PPC, recorded by the learned trial court through
the impugned judgment, are hereby set-aside. He, however,
having been proved guilty of the offence under section 202
PPC, is convicted and sentenced under the said offence to
undergo imprisonment for six months and to pay Rs.50,000/-
as fine and in default thereof to further undergo one month
simple imprisonment. Benefit of section 382-B Cr.P.C. is
extended to him.

28. The learned trial court though has framed charge under
section 15 KP Arms Act, 2013 against both the appellants, but
in the judgment neither any findings with regard to acquittal or
conviction of the appellants has been given by the learned trial
court under the said section of law. The learned trial court
probably has purposely kept mum in this regard for the reasons

that on one hands the arms recovered from the appellants were
34

officials which amounts to implied acquittal of the appellants.
The prosecution having not moved appeal against such implied
acquittal of the appellants seems to have abandoned the charge
against the appellants under section 15 KP Arms Act, 2013. In
this regard case titled, “Shera and 6 others Vs the Crown”

(PLD 1954 Federal Court 141) can also be referred relevant

part of which is reproduced below:-

“The trial judge was careful only to record his
findings in respect of the charges on which he found
the various accused persons guilty. His omission to
record express findings in relation to the other
offences charged cannot, however, affect the
substantive position namely that in the absence_of
express reservation by the trial Judge, in respect of
each of these offences, for the purpose of law, he
must be deemed to have recorded a finding of not
guilty and to have made an operative order_of
acquittal in consequence of such finding”.

Similar is the view of this court in case titled,“Abid Khan vs
the State” (2018 YLR Note 180 Peshawar), wherein accused
was charged under sections 302 and 427 PPC. Charge was
framed against accused under both the aforesaid offences by
the learned trial court. On conclusion of trial the accused was
convicted and sentenced under section 302(b) PPC, however,
judgment of the learned trial court was silent with regard to

conviction or acquittal of the accused under section 427
35

Cr.P.C. This court while deciding the appeal of the convict-
accused rendered the following observation: -

“Although charge of offence under section 427 PPC
was also framed but in the absence of evidence; and,
apparently, charge also not pressed by the prosecution
against the appellant/accused; the learned trial court
did not record judgment/order of either acquittal or
conviction, hence, amounting to ‘implied acquittal’ of
the appellant/accused. The prosecution, having not
moved appeal against such ‘implied acquittal’ seems
to have abandoned the charge against the
appellant/accused”.

29. Placing reliance on the judgments (supra) we hold that
the impugned judgment to the extent of section 15 KP Arms
Act, 2013, amounts to implied acquittal of the appellants.

30. With the above modification in the conviction and
sentences of the appellants the connected Cr.R. No.170-
P/2023, is also dismissed.

Announced:

M.Siraj Afridi CS

JUSTICE

SB of Mr. Justice Ishtiag Ibrahim Hon’ble the
And Hon’ ble Mr. Justice Wigar Ahmad
