Judgment Sheet
PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, BANNU BENCH
(Judicial Department)
Cr.A No.13-B of 2023

Nawaz Khan alias Margha
Vs
The State ete

JUDGMENT

For appellant: M/s Fagir Mehboob-ul-Hamid and Hujjat

Ullah Khan, Advocates
For respondents: Haji Hamayun Khan Wazir Advocate
For State: Mr. Umer Qayyum, Asstt. A.G.

Date of hearing: 31.05.2023

fees
DR. KHURSHID IQBAL, J.--- By this single judgment we
intend to dispose of the subject criminal appeal (No. 13-B/2023)
and the connected criminal appeal (No.19-B/2023). Both have
arisen out of the same criminal case which the trial court
decided by its judgment rendered on 12.01.2023. Samiullah
(appellant in the connected appeal; hercinafier “complainant”)
registered the case against Nawaz Khan alias Margha (accused-
convict; hereinafter “appellant” in the subject appeal). The
complainant charged the appellant under sections 302/324, PPC
in Police Station, Lakki Marwat, at the strength of FIR No.267,
on 18.07.2018. The Additional Sessions Judge-HI/Model

Criminal Trial Court (MCTC) in Lakki Marwat, conducted the
-2-

trial of the appellant. She convicted the appellant under section
302 (b), PPC, and acquitted him from the charge under section
324, PPC. She recorded the conviction and sentence in the.
following terms:

The accused facing trial namely Nawaz
Khan alias Margha s/o Nazar Khan is
convicted under section 302(b) PPC
and sentenced to death as_ ta’zir.
Convict Nawaz Khan shall be hanged
by the neck till he is dead and has been
confirmed to be dead by the medical
officer in the presence of Judicial
Magistrate on duty in jail. However,
this conviction is subject to
confirmation by the august Peshawar
High Court. The convict shall also be
liable to pay Rs.10,00,000/- as
compensation to the legal heirs of
deceased Abdur Rehman u/s 544-A
Cr.PC and in case of default, he shall
further undergo simple imprisonment
for six months.

2. The first information of the case was furnished by the
complainant in the Emergency Room of the Rural Health
Centre (RIIC) of Gambila town, where he had taken the dead
body of one Abdur Rahman, his nephew. ‘The information was
that on 18.07.2018, the complainant and Abdur Rehman, was
on the way back home after taking care of their ficlds. When
they reached near the Government Primary School (Malic)
Kotka Gul Zaffar Khwaja Khel, at about 18:35 hours, the

appellant, their co-villager, duly armed with a Kalashnikov,
-3-

came there on a motorcycle (CD-70). The appellant alighted
from the bike. IIe started firing at them. As a result of his firing,
Abdur Rahman was hit and fell on the ground; the complainant
luckily escaped unhurt. Soon after the occurrence, the appellant
decamped from the crime scene. Motive the complainant
disclosed was that the appellant wanted what he termed as
friendship with the deceased which the deceased had declined.
3. After completion of investigation, complete challan was
put for trial against the appellant. The trial court supplied copics
of the relevant documents to the appellant under section 265-C
Cr.P.C. Charge was framed against the appellant under 302,
PPC, for qatl-i-amd of Abdur Rahman and under 324, PPC, for
ineffective firing at the complainant, to which he pleaded not
guilty and professed innocence. The prosecution examined 12
witnesses. The appellant was examined under section 342
Cr.P.C, wherein he denied the charges and refuted the evidence
of the prosecution. He didn’t avail the opportunity to record
evidence in defence or to give statement on oath within the
meaning of section 340(2) Cr.P.C. After hearing arguments of
the prosecution and defence, the trial court convicted the
appellant under 302 (b), PPC, as per the details stated above,
and acquitted him from the charge under 324, PPC.

4. We have anxiously considered the submissions advanced

at the bar and perused the record.
-4-

5. The prosecution case primarily depends on the ocular
account the complainant furnished as the sole cye witness of the
occurrence (PW8). For the sake of brevity, we would avoid
repeating his statement recorded as cxamination-in-chicf. The
same mostly reiterates the story of the incident narrated in the
FIR. We would evaluate his statement under cross cxamination
instead in which the defence endeavoured to establish that he
was not present on the crime scene, and/or that he was an
interested witness. Key aspects of his cross examination relate
to:

e The colour of the motorcycle of the
appellant;

e Disclosure of the crime scene, most
particularly the directions;

e The arrival of Wahccdullah, his
brother (PW7) at the crime scene and
the shifting of the dead body of the
deceased to the hospital;

e The attraction of other people to the
crime scene;

e The occurrence of the death of the
deceased on the crime scene; and

e The production of the record of rights
of the ficlds (the land) which he had
gone to look after alongwith the
deceased.

6. ‘The complainant replicd that at the time of the report, the
police official did not ask him about the colour of the
motorcycle of the appellant. IIc added that during the

investigation also, he did not disclose the colour of the
-5-

motorcycle. Even then he stated that the motorcycle of the
appellant was of black colour. This fact was not disputed
anymore. As regards the disclosure of the directions in the FIR,
he replied in the affirmative. It is an established judicial view
that an FIR is not supposed to reflect the story of the
commission of the crime in minute details. ‘The purpose is to
furnish the very first information regarding the commission of
an offence. Indeed, many more details are to come forward
during the investigation. [lowever, he was further challenged
on being asked a couple of questions. Before we consider his
replics in this respect, we may make reference to the site plan
(:x.PB). A close reading of the site plan would show that the
occurrence took place on a Kacha path, leading to the village of
the complainant party. ‘The crime scence is situated to the north
of a Pakka road, leading to Khwaja Khel and Tajazai. The
complainant party was moving from southwest towards
northeast. Coming back to the statement of the complainant, it
appears that he was able to state the directions correctly. As his
deposition evinces:

Our village is situated towards cast to
the spot of occurrence. I have pointed
out the spot to the I.O which is correct
with all its footnotes. The landed
property is situated towards west of
the place of occurrence. There is a
mettled {metalled] road near the place
of occurrence. The [metalled] road is
situated towards south of the place of
-6-

occurrence at a distance of 30/40
paces. This road is leading from
Tajazai to village Khwaja Khel and
Kheaja Khel is towards cast of it. The
village Tajazai is situated towards
eastern side.

7. As regards the arrival of Waheedullah (PW7) to the
crime scene and shifting of the dead body to the hospital, the
complainant deposed that Waheedullah (his brother) reached to
the crime scene on a motorcycle within 4 to 5 minutes of the
occurrence. IIe further deposed that his village is situated at a
distance of about 02 kilometres from the crime scene. Ice added
that Waheedullah managed to bring a datsun pickup to the
crime scene within 45 to 60 minutes for shifling the dead body
to the hospital. Wahcedullah’s testimony (PW7) needs to be
examined here. When entered the witness box, he deposed in
examination-in-chicf that he identified the dead body of the
deceased before the Medical Officer. While under cross
examination, it was rather confirmed from him that he had
reached the crime scene at about 06.45 pm after having been
informed by the complainant; he accompanied the complainant
from the crime scene while the dead body was being shifted to
the hospital and that the dead body was shifted from the crime
scene at 08.00 pm. Indeed, Waheedullah was not present at the
time of the occurrence, a fact, which, too, was confirmed from

him under cross examination. Waheedullah’s testimony thus
-7-

substantiates that the complainant informed him at his home
from the crime scene and when he reached there, the
complainant was already present there.

8. Adverting to the issuc pertaining to the attraction of other
people to the crime scene, the complainant affirmatively
deposed that from the locality, some people, such as, Jamal,
Kamil, Nawab, etc, rushed to the crime scene, but he didn’t
produce them to the Investigating Officer for recording their
statements. In the same vein, the complainant also admitted that
the datsun pick up’s driver Amin Jan, too, was not examined as
witness. Indeed, it would have been much better, had these
persons, or anyone amongst them, been cxamined. I lowever,
there could be no disputing the truth that potential witnesses
usually remain reluctant to come forward as witnesses so as to
shun inviting enmity of the accused party. Though unfortunate,
il is common knowledge that the general public avoid coming
forward as witnesses in criminal cases. The courts have been
considering it since long. Reference may, for example, be made
to a 1976 case of Rahim Bakhsh v. Muhammad Iqbal etc.
(1976 SCMR 528). Morcover, prosecution is bound to produce
material witnesses in support of its case.

9. The issuc of the exact time of the death of the deceased is
linked to the medical evidence. ‘The complainant stated in the

FIR that the deceased breathed his last on the crime scence. In
-8-

other words, the information he furnished was that as a result of
the firearm injuries, the deccased died on the spot
instantancously. The post-mortem cxamination report shows
that the probable time between injury and death was 20-30
minutes. Learned counsel for the appellant accentuated this
entry of the post-mortem report, presenting it as a material
contradiction. This aspect may need deeper critical analysis. In
the post-mortem report, it is the probable and not the exact time
beiween the injury and death that is recorded by a medical
officer. The following explanations of the word “probable” are
worth reading:

(a) The common use of this word is no
doubt to imply that something is
more likely to happen than not. In
conversation, if one says to another
“If you go out in this weather you
will probably catch a cold” this is, I
think, equivalent to saying that one

hy believes there is an odds on chance
“iy that the other will catch a cold. The
word “probable” need not,
however, bear _ this narrow
meaning... A close study of the rule
was made by the Court of Appeal in
the case of Victoria Laundry
(Windsor) Ltd v § Newman
Industries Ltd [[1949] 1 All ER
997|. The judgment of the court was
delivered by Asquith LJ who
suggested the phrase “liable to
result” as appropriate to describe
the degree of probability required.
This may be a_ colourless
expression, but I do not find it
-9-

possible to improve on it. If the
word “likelihood” is used, it may
convey the impression that the
chances are all in favour of the
thing happening, an idea which I
would reject. The Heron II, Konfos
v Czarnikow (C) Ltd [1967] 3 All
ER 686 at 707-708, HL, per Lord
Hodson:
‘The word “probable” is a
common enough word. I
understand it to mean that
something is likely to
happen.’ Goldman v Thai
Airways International — Lid
[1983] 3 All ER 693 at 700,
CA, per Eveleigh LJ
|Words And Phrases Legally Defined;
LexisNexis, 2013, 4" Ed., pp615-16|

(b)Probable. “Probable” means having
more evidence for than against;
supported by evidence which
inclines the mind to believe, but

4 leaves some room for doubt.
JP Ramanatha Atyar’s Advanced Law

Lexicon, Shakil Ahmad Khan, vol. 3,
2017, 5" lid. LexisNexis, p4081 |

10. The information the complainant furnished, too, couldn’t
be scen with arithmetic precision. It needs no mention that
witnessing the murder, most notably of a near and dear one
(brother, father, nephew, etc) tends to be a_ traumatic
experience, triggcring physical, and cmotionally disturbing
response and generating feclings of shock, stress, anxiety,
intimidation and anger. The scene changes abruptly. No one can

exactly visualizc what a witness has actually scen. Indeed, it is
-10-

a moment full of the greatest grief and shock while witnessing a
victim taking the last breaths of his life. In such a situation the
exact time of the expiry of the deccased was not possible to be
stated. Even otherwise, the probable time of death—20-30
minutes per the post-mortem report—happened on the crime
scene as it took sufficient to arrange a datsun pick for its
removal to the hospital. It mcans that the mere fact the
complainant stated that the death occurred instantancously
couldn’t be considered as much a material doubt as to lay axe at
the roots of the prosccution case. ‘hen, usually people from the
near around areca are attracted. Nothing could be observed with
precision and that, 100, with an idea that evidence of the same
would be furnished before the Court. Morcover, it usually takes
some time for all those on the crime scene to come back to the
normal senses after what has happened. All that is required to
be brought on the record and proved at the trial is that a crime
has been committed, which a witness(s) has/have scen directly
and that has resulted in the death/injury to somcone. These
circumstances are very much available in the instant case in the
light of the above examination of the evidence and also proved.
In light of the observations made in Nasir Ahmed Vs The State
(2023 SCMR 478), it is scttled law that where ocular evidence
is found trustworthy and confidence inspiring—as is the case

before us—then the samc is given preference over medical
-Il-

evidence and the same alonc is sufficient to sustain conviction
of an accused. I‘urther, medical evidence is always considered
a corroborative piece of evidence. It is treated to be
confirmatory in nature. Another significant aspect of the
medical evidence—the injury sheet, the inquest report and post-
mortem report—evince that the deceased received two entry
wounds with two exit wounds. Both arc noted to be of the same
size. This has proved that a single firearm weapon was used for
the commission of the offence by a single person. If the ocular
account is fully reliable in support of an incident, then a minor
contradiction in the medical and ocular evidence should lose
their weight. |Shafqgat Ali and others v. The State (PLD 2005
S.C 288)].

11. Last, but not the Icast, the complainant didn’t produce
any document showing his ownership of the land he and the
deceased had visited. If the prosecution has proved the natural
presence of the complainant on the crime scene, the purpose of
his visit to the land would become a secondary aspect. If at all,
it may, at best, be seen as a minor discrepancy. In Falak Sher v.
The State (NLR 2000 Criminal 188), the Supreme Court
observed minor inconsistencies not of fatal character may not
be used for acquittal though may be sccn as a miligating
circumstances.

12. Learned counsel for the appellant raised two more
-12-

objections on the testimony of the complainant. Firstly, the
complainant is an interested witness because he is the real uncle
of the deceased; and secondly, in District Lakki Marwat, in the
month of July, people usually don’t go at such time as 06.30 pm
to look after their ficlds. As regards the first objection, it is fully
established that the complainant was the only witness
accompanying, the deceased at the relevant time. He was a
natural witness. Mere close relationship of a witness is not fatal
to the prosecution case. It nceds no emphasis that all that must
be scen is the intrinsic worth of evidence of an cye witness, no
matter how close relative of the complainant party he may be.
The intrinsic worth of the evidence shall come from its being
natural, true and confidence inspiring. As discussed above, his
presence on the crime scene was not shattered. So far as the
second objection goes, suffice it to say that the complainant was
not asked any question under cross examination that his visit to
his fields at the relevant time is not practised as a part of the
folkways (traditional behaviour or way of life of the local
community). The Investigating Officer also collected no such
evidence, nor was he cross-examined in this connection. The
evidence demonstrates that the village of the complainant party
is situated at a distance of about 02 Kilometres, a short distance,
indeed. The mere fact that people would not go out at that point

of time and that the complainant party had gone out could not
be scen as an act casting doubt on the very happening of the
incident. Then, a question would arise as to why the
complainant would charge the appellant falsely when, as per his
own deposition, he stated to have no enmity with the appellant
or even other persons in his village.

13. We would now examine the recovery of 04 cmptics of
7.62mm bore picked up from the crime scene. The empties
were examined in the Forensic Science Laboratory (I'SI.). The
significance of the I'SL report lies in the fact that the empties
were found to have been fired from one and the same weapon.
It doubtlessly means that the empties were fired by one person.
Ilowever, on balance, it is worth noting that no evidence was
produced as who took the parcel containing the emptics to the
SL. Morcover, the emptics were received in the SL on
15.08.2018, after 28 days of the occurrence. It may be observed
here that: firstly, the weapon of offence was not recovered from
the appellant. Secondly, no specific malice was attributed to the
Investigating Officer. Thirdly, and if at all it is seen something
to be reckoned with, the omission could at best be described as
the inefficiency of the Investigating Officer. In Nawaz v. The
State (2003 YLR 2926), this Court has held that mere delay in
sending the recovered articles to the expert, in the absence of
any malice on the part of the Investigating Officer, is not a good

ground for rejecting their value and worth. Likewise, in Akhtar
-14-

Ali v. The State (2016 PCrLJN 3), it was held that in absence
of the crime weapon, the non-sending of the crime empties to
the ISL, particularly in a case of single accused, would not
damage the prosecution casc.

14. Learned counsel for the appellant raised objection
regarding the shifting of the dead body from the crime scene to
the hospital. he PM report depicts that the dead body was
taken to the hospital by Waheedullah. The inquest report shows
that the dead body was reccived by the same Waheedullah. The
objection of the learned counsel was that why didn’t the
complainant shift the dcad body to the hospital. We have
already discussed above with reference to the statements of the
complainant and Wahecdullah. The depositions of those
witnesses show that the complainant informed Wahccedullah,
his brother. The latter reached to the spot. He, then, managed a
datsun pickup. IIe and the complainant jointly shifted the dead
body to the hospital at 08.00 pm from the crime scene. ASI
Ghulam Saboor (PW2), the scribe of the murasila, deposed that
in the inquest report, he has not mentioned the name of the
complainant; rather he has mentioned the name of
Waheedullah, having identified the dead body, alongwith one
Sher Zaman Khan. We are of the view that the prosecution has
substantially explained that PW Wahcedullah reached to the

crime scene quickly after having been informed by the
-15-

complainant, who thereafter procured the vehicle for shifting
the dead body. Thus, his presence on the spot at that time is
proved and it would make no difference if his name was
mentioned in the inquest report as well as in the post-mortem
report.

15. Coming to the delay in lodging the FIR. The arrangement
of the vehicle is a time-consuming effort. The locality is
typically a rural one. The distance between the crime scene and
the hospital as the complainant has told, is 08 to 10 miles
(approximately 12-16 Kilometres). There is no hard and fast
rule that delay in lodging the report would automatically
render the prosecution case injuriously doubtful unless there
is sufficient evidence indicating consultation and
deliberation. What is important is that it depends upon facts
and circumstances of cach case. Ihe time spent in
arrangement of a vehicle vis-a-vis the distance between the
crime scene and the hospital makes delay natural. Needless to
state that anyone, cspccially a close relative, a fact in the case in
hand, who witnesses a murder couldn’t be expected to act
mechanically with a more than reasonable promptitude. So, the
delay not being tainted with mala fide, deliberation and
consultation, wouldn’t negatively impinge on the veracity of the
prosecution casc. In this respect, reference may be made to Ali

Ahmed v. The State (2022 PCrLJ 1480), in which it has been
-16-

held that mere delay in reporting of crime to the police by itself
is not fatal to the prosecution case.

16. As regards the minor discrepancies, referred to above,
suffice it to say that acquittal cannot be recorded solely on the
ground of minor discrepancies or contradictions. It is settled
law that any contradiction or discrepancy which docs not go
deep to the roots of a criminal case cannot be made sole ground
for acquittal. The reason is that if the practice of recording
acquittal on the basis of irrelevant discrepancies or
contradictions is allowed to prevail, then conviction in criminal
cases will become impossible. Needless to mention that this has
never been the intent and purpose behind the concept of
appraisal of evidence in administration of criminal justice.
While appreciating the effect of minor discrepancics in one of
the latest cases, the Supreme Court held that:

It is a well settled proposition of law
that as long as the material aspects of
the evidence have a ring of truth,
courts should ignore minor
discrepancies in the evidence. If an
omission or discrepancy goes to the
root of the matter, the defence can
take advantage of the same. While
appreciating the evidence of a
witness, the approach must be
whether the evidence read as a whole
appears to have a ring of truth. Minor
discrepancies on trivial matters not
affecting the material considerations
of the prosecution case ought not to
prompt the courts to reject evidence
-1|7-

in its  cntirety. Such minor
discrepancies which do not shake the
salient features of the prosecution
ease should be ignored. [/mran
Mehmood v. The State and another
(2023 SCMR 795)]

17. Ina 2022 case, the Court ruled:

While appreciating the evidence, the
court must not = attach undue
importance to minor
discrepancies and such minor
discrepancies which do not shake the
salient features of the prosecution
case should be ignored. The accused
cannot claim premium of such minor
discrepancies. If importance be given
to such insignificant inconsistencies
then there would hardly be any
conviction. |Shamsher Ahmad and
another v. The State and others (2022
SCMR 1931)]

Coming to the motive, the general principle is that:
firstly, it is not necessary for the prosecution to allege motive in
each and every case. Sccondly, once sct up, motive must be
proved. Motive is a state of mind of an accused person. It
always remains secret and concealed until exposed through
spoken words or actions. ‘The complainant stated in the IR that
the appellant /iked the deceased; he urged the deceased to keep
company with him. Vhe deceased, he added, was not willing to
do so. Ele reiterated it in his deposition. The Investigating
Officer stated that he asked about the motive from the people in

the locality which was confirmed. Ilowever, he didn’t record
-18-

the statement of any witness to clicit its proof. It means, no
independent evidence came forth. However, except his oral
testimony, the prosecution has failed to bring on the record
independent evidence to substantiate the motive. One can’t help
appreciate that the nature of the motive is such that generally
people avoid talking about it publically and, more so, in a court
of law. The deceased, as the private counsel for the complainant
stated at the bar, was a young handsome teenage boy of 12/13
years. This is undisputed. But, on balance, the appellant, too, is
a young late teenage boy. Ilis urge is absolutely not justified.
Given his mental immaturity, the event preceded the incident
appears to have flared up his emotions induced by displeasure
which led to rob him of the power of self-control.

19. ‘he jurisprudence developed by our Supreme Court on
the role of a failed and/or non-proved motive as a mitigating
factor in award of punishment is quite rich. Cases which may
be called somewhat carlicr ones are:

e Mst. Bevi v. Ghulam Shabbir and
another (1980 SCMR 859)

e Ansar Ahmad Khan Burki v. The State
and another (1993 SCMR 1660)

e Falak Sher v. The State (NLR 2000
Criminal 188)

Recent rulings are:

e Zahoor Ahmad v. State (2017 SCMR
1662).
e Hag Nawaz v. The State 2018 SCMR
21)
e Muhammad Umar v. The State (2022
P.Cr.L.J. 695)

In the last mentioned case, the Court observed:

The law is settled by now that if the
prosecution asserts a motive but fails
to prove the same then such failure on
the part of the prosecution may react
against a sentence of death passed
against a convict on the charge of
murder |...].

The Court referred to the following case:

e Ahmad Nawaz v. The State (2011
SCMR 593)

© Iftikhar Mehmood and another vv.
Qaiser Iftikhar and others (2011 SCMR
1165)

e Muhammad Mumtaz v. The State and
another (2012 SCMR 267)

e@ Muhammad Imran @ Asif v. The State
(2013 SCMR 782)

e Sabir Hussain alias Sabri v. The State
(2013 SCMR 1554)

e Zeeshan Afzal alias Shani and another
v. The State and another (2013 SCMR
1602)

e Naveed alias Needu and others v. The
State and others (2014 SCMR 1464)

e Muhammad Nadeem Wagas and
another v. The State (2014 SCMR 1658)

e Muhammad Asif v. Muhammad
Akhtar and others (2016 SCMR 2035);
and

e Qaddan and others v. The State (2017
SCMR 148)

20. ‘The conclusion of the above discussion, after the above
-20-

reappraisal of the evidence, is that the prosecution has proved
that the complainant was present at the crime scene and has
furnished direct evidence as the cye witness of the occurrence.
Ilis evidence is direct, concrete and confidence inspiring. The
defence has not been able to shatter his presence on the spot and
bring ill will on his part for roping the appellant in the case. The
recovery of the emptics from the crime and the medical
evidence convincingly propped up the complainant’s evidence.
No question of misidentification of the appellant was raised.
Certain discrepancies did surface, such as, delay in lodging the
report; delay in sending the cmptics to the FSL; and proof of
the motive. Afier having examined these discrepancies in
juxtaposition with other key aspects, such as, the dircct,
positive and confidence inspiring evidence of the complainant;
the recovery of the crime emptics and blood stained earth from
the crime scene and their positive FSI. report; the appellant
being a single accused duly identificd on spot, we have reached
to the conclusion that the prosecution has proved the charge of
qatl-i-amd against the appellant.

21. We would now consider the issue of sentencing. ‘The
learned trial Judge has imposed the sentence of death for two
reasons: firstly, the same is the normal penalty for qatl-i-amd;
and secondly, the young age of the appellant is not a mitigating

factor. The trial Court has relied on the ruling given in the case
-2b-

of State Vs Waheed Iqbal (2005 PCr.LJ 1384) and 2010
PCr.LJ 1687 SC (AJ&K).

22. We have no central law of sentencing. ‘'wo provinces—
the Punjab and the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa—have introduced
sentencing laws in 2019 and 2021, respectively. Both the laws
have the same text. They don’t apply to cases where capital
punishment is provided within the range of punishments.
However, they lay down aggravating and mitigating factors
which the (trial) court only may take into consideration while
passing a sentence. Section 14(3) of the KP law provides that
the court shall schedule a separate hearing for sentencing.
Though, the 2021 KP law is not applicable to offences carrying
capital punishment, still a separate hearing on sentencing would
be helpful for a trial court. We respectfully urge the trial courts
to conduct such separate hearing. Section 3(2) (a) of the KP law
provides the age of the offender as onc of the mitigating factors.
Despite the absence of a sentencing law until very recently, the
higher courts have attended to the issue in their judicial
pronouncements. In a 2010 case, the Supreme Court held that
the question of sentence demands utmost care on the part of the
court dealing with the life and libertics of the accused person
(Nadeem alias Manha alias Billa Sher v. State 2010 SCMR
949 Supreme Court). \n Muhammad Ashraf v. State (2006 P

Cr. L J 1431), it was held that the courts should not be
mechanical in awarding, sentence. ‘They are supposed to think
and consider what a proper sentence ought to be. In the case of
Saleemuddin v. State (2011 SCMR 1171), the Supreme Court
of Pakistan has held that while awarding any sentence, the
Court should always keep in mind all the surrounding
circumstances, under which a particular offence is committed.

23.

-22-

In Dhananjoy Chatterjee alias Dhana v. State of W.B

(1994 2 SCC 220), the Supreme Court of India held:

24.

of Gujarat and Others (2006 2 SCC 359), the Supreme Court

15...Imposition of appropriate
punishment is the manner in which the
courts respond to the society's cry for
justice against the criminals. Justice
demands that courts should impose
punishment befitting the crime so that
the courts reflect public abhorrence of
the crime [...}.

In the case of Shailesh Jasvantbhai and Another v. State

of India observed:

Friedman in his Law in Changing
Society stated that: "State of criminal
law continues to be--as it should be--a
decisive reflection of social
consciousness of society." Therefore,
in operating the sentencing system, law
should adopt the corrective machinery
or deterrence based on factual matrix.
By deft modulation, sentencing process
be stern where it should be, and
tempered with mercy where it
warrants to be. The facts and given
circumstances in each case, the nature
of the crime, the manner in which it
-23-

was planned and committed, the
motive for commission of the crime,
the conduct of the accused, the nature
of weapons used and ail other
attending circumstances are relevant
facts which would enter into the area
of consideration.

25. Wc have observed that the appellant is in his late teenage,
aged about 19/20 years. The appellant has attained the age of
majority. However, at such an age, mental maturity is still
lacking. Next, the motive though was not proved independently.
The Investigating Officer probed it in the locality. As we have
observed above, the motive as expressed in the IIR is not
usually spelt out in the public. Moreover, no other motive was
stated. ‘Then, the circumstances preceding the incident could be
said to have put the appellant in distress duc to which he could
be safely said to have lost self-control, especially due to low
mental maturity. We are of the view that life term would help
reate a scope for his reformation with the passage of time as
his mental maturity increases.
26. As acorollary of the above discussion, while maintaining
the conviction under section 302 (b), PPC, we partially allow
this appeal by converting the death penalty to life
imprisonment. On balance, however, we enhance the amount of
fine from Rs. One million to Rs. Two million, which, if
realized, shall be paid to the Icgal heirs of the deceased as

compensation under scction 544-A, Cr.PC. In default of
-24-

payment of fine, he shall further undergo 06 months S.1. Benefit
under section 382-B Cr.PC is extended to the convict-appellant.
We answer the death reference in the negative.

27. So far as the criminal appeal of the complainant against
acquittal of the appellant under section 324, PPC, is concerned,
we find that the appellant had no intention to commit qatl-i-amd
of the complainant. [Jad the appellant any intention to commit
the murder of the complainant, he could do so casily, especially
keeping in vicw the distance between the two and the fact that
the complainant was empty handed. ‘The acquittal of the
convict-appellant under section 324 PPC is, thus, justified.
Resultantly, the connected Criminal Appeal No.19-B/2023
titled “Samiullah Khan v. The State” is hereby dismissed.

28. ‘These arc the reasons for our short order of even date.

Announced
31.05.2023 a
(Ghafoor Zaman) Le ca
JUDGE
J 7

he

16 \

(D.B)
Hon'ble Mr. Justice Fazal Subhan
Hon'ble Mr. Justice Dr. Khurshid Iqbal
