IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
BANNU BENCH
(Judicial Department)

Criminal Appeal No.350-B of 2019
With Murder Reference No.09-B/2019

Wahidullah
Versus
The State etc

Date of hearing 18.01.2021

For Appellant: Mr. Sawal Nazir Khan, Advocate:

For the State: Mr.Shahid Hameed Qureshi Addl: A.G.

JUDGMENT

2 2 Re ak ek

SAHIBZADA ASADULLAH, J.— This criminal appeal is
directed against the judgment dated 31.10.2019 in Sessions
Case No.27/VII of 2018-19, passed by learned Additional
Sessions Judge-I/Judge MCTC Karak, whereby the appellant
Wahid Ullah involved in case F.I.R No. 393 dated 13.9.2018
registered at Police Station Latamber, District Karak, was
convicted under section 302(b) P.P.C read with section 338-C
PPC and sentenced to death on two counts, and to pay a
compensation Rs.2,00,000/-(two lac) under section 544-A

Cr.P.C, to the legal heirs of the deceased, recoverable as
2

arrears of land revenue or in default thereof to suffer six
months imprisonment. Murder Reference No.09-B of 2019 has
also been sent by the learned trial Court under section 374
Cr.PC for its confirmation or otherwise, hence, we intend to
decide both the matters through the one and the same

judgment.

2. It is pertinent to mention that, at the time of arrest
of the appellant a Kalashnikov alongwith a fitted magazine
containing 10 live rounds of 7.62 bore, was recovered from his
possession, in which respect case FIR No. FIR No.395 dated
14.09.2018, under section 15 AA, Police Station Latamber,
District Karak, was registered. The case was put in court and
on conclusion of the trial, the learned trial Court was pleased
to convict the appellant vide judgment dated 31.10.2019, to
three years R.I. Both the judgments were impugned before this

court through the instant jail criminal appeal.

3. Brief facts of the prosecution case narrated in the
FIR (Ex.P.A), are that on 13.09.2018 at 13:20 hours,
complainant Awaz Gul brought the dead-body of his daughter
Mst. Asia Bibi to the Police Station Latambar Karak, and
reported the matter to the effect that he visited the house of his
daughter Mst. Asia Bibi and was present there, when in the

meanwhile, the deceased rushed to the outer gate on hearing
3

the fire shots, when she opened the gate the accused/appellant
entered the house and fired at Mst. Asia Bibi, she got hit and
died on the spot whereas, the accused after commission of
offence decamped from the spot. The motive was stated to be
a dispute over attending of funeral ceremony of one Mohib
Khan. One Ghaus ur Rehman, verified the report as an
eyewitness to the occurrence. Nazar Abbas SHO (PW-6)
reduced the report in the shape of F.I.R, prepared injury sheet
Ex.P.W.6/2 and inquest report Ex.P.W.6/3, of the deceased
and sent the dead body to Women & Children Hospital,
Karak, under the escort of Constable Nazeer Daad (PW-5),
where Dr. Saira Nazneen (PW-01) conducted autopsy on dead
body of the deceased. The investigation was conducted by
Rasheed Ullah SI, who was examined as PW-8, on receipt of
copy of F.LR the Investigating Officer visited the spot,
prepared site-plan (Ex: PB), secured blood stained earth from
the place of deceased alongwith two empties of 7.62 bore and
a spent bullet, which were taken into possession vide recovery
memo Ex.PC/1. He also took into possession blood-stained
garments of the deceased and sealed the same in Parcel No.4
(Ex.P4). The Investigating Officer, took into possession
Kalashnikov alongwith a fit magazine vide recovery memo
EXPC/2. He after recording statements of the witnesses and

conducting further necessary investigation handed over the
4

case file to Mumtaz Khan SHO, Police Station Latamber (PW-
03), for submission of complete challan, which was
accordingly submitted. The formalities provided under section
265-C Cr.P.C were complied with. Charge was framed against
the appellant on 29.11.2018, to which he pleaded ‘not guilty’
and claimed trial. The prosecution in order to prove guilt of
the accused produced and examined as many as eleven (1!)
witnesses. On close of prosecution evidence statement of
accused was recorded under section 342 Cr.P.C, wherein he
professed his innocence, however, he did not wish to be
examined on oath as provided under section 340(2) Cr.P.C,
and also abstained from producing evidence in defence. After
hearing arguments of learned counsel for the parties, the
learned trial Court vide impugned judgment dated 31.10.2019

convicted and sentenced the appellant, as mentioned above.

4. Heard. Record perused.

5. It is pertinent to mention that the learned trial Court
framed the charge against the appellant under three different
heads:
(i) U/s 449 PPC for house trespass in order to
commit offence punishable with death;

(ii) U/s 302 PPC for the murder of deceased and;
5
(iii) U/s 338-C PPC for Isqat-i-Janin.
6. The moot point for determination for this Court is
to determine as to whether in the given circumstances of the
case, the learned trial Court was justified in awarding
conviction to the appellant under section 338-C PPC, as by the
time when the deceased was done to death a cephalic foetus of
39 weeks was found in her womb, who too fell a victim to the
fire shots. This Court is to see as what should be the
appropriate sentence in the given circumstances of the case.
There is no denial to the fact that the dead body of the
deceased was shifted to the hospital where her postmortem
examination was conducted which transpired that the deceased
at the time of incident was pregnant and so abdominal
ultrasonography (USG Abdomen/Pelvis) was conducted where

a single dead cephalic foetus of 39 weeks was found.

7. We are confronted with a situation where a
finding is needed to determine as to under which section of
law the charge is to be framed whether it should be 338-C or
302 PPC. There is no denial to the fact that the learned trial
Court convicted the appellant under section 338-C PPC
instead section 302 PPC, but failed to advance any plausible
reasons The learned trial Court while framing the charge did

not take pains to apply its judicial mind to the facts and
6

circumstances of the case to apply the correct section of law,
despite the fact that the post mortem report was present before
him. In order to ascertain that what should be the correct law
on the subject i.e. section 338-C or section 302 of the Pakistan
Penal Code. To resolve the controversy we deem it
appropriate to reproduce the relevant section of law i.e. 338-B

PPC which defines the offence:

“338-B. Who ever, causes a woman with a
child some of whose limbs or organs have
been found, to miscarry, if such miscarriage is
not caused in good faith for the purpose of
saving the life of the woman, is said to cause
Isqat-i-Janin”.
If the offence falls with in the ambit of section 338-B PPC

then the punishment is provided under section 338-C PPC,

which reads as follow:

“Whoever causes isqat-i-janin shall be liable to:-

(a) one-twentieth of the diyat if the child is born dead;

(b) full diyat if the child is born alive but dies as a result of

any act of the offender; and

(c) imprisonment of either description for a term which may

extend to seven years as ta'zir:
Provided that, if there are more than one child in the

womb of the woman, the offender shall be liable to
7

separate diyat or ta'zir, as the case may be/for every
such child:

Provided further that if, as a result of isqat-i-janin, any
hurt is caused to the woman or she dies, the offender
shall also be liable to the punishment provided for such
hurt or death, as the case may be”.
8. The language of section 338-B PPC is very much
clear which refers to a child, some of whose limbs or organs
have been formed, whereas, in the present case, according to
the medical evidence, the child was cephalic foetus of 39
weeks. We, before dilating upon the merits of the case, feel it
essential to determine the issue in hand as to whether a child
in the womb of a mother can be called a person, we deem it
essential to discussed different stages of birth of a child in the
womb of a mother in view of the medical science as well as

Islamic Law.

9. Technically, the term developing ovum is used
for the first seven to ten days after conception i.e. until
implantation occurs. It is called an ‘embryo! from one week to
the end of the second month and later it is called 'foetus’. It
becomes an infant only when it is completely born. The life
may enter immediately on the date of conception in the form
of a small cell, which gets multiplied, but physically a mother

can feel the movement of a child only, when the foetus turns
8

twenty weeks old i.e. five months, as the cell changes its
structures and texture to become an eye, legs, bones, blood,
head etc, and only when the child makes movements by
touching the internal walls of the womb, then the actual life
does take its physical form, therefore, there may be
controversy as regards to the exact time of life entering the
foetus but there is no controversy as regards the life of the
unborn child if a woman is carrying seven months pregnancy,
as in many instances premature delivery takes place after
expiry of seven months of pregnancy and even then the child

survives.

10. There is no controversy in holding that an unborn
child whose existence in the mother’s womb exceeds five
months till its birth is treated no other but a child in existence,
and the instant case is no exception, such a child can be called
a “person”. The word “person” has been defined in the
Pakistan Penal Code, Chapter-II: General Explanation.
Section-11 “person”. — The word “person” includes any
company or association, or body of person, whether

incorporated or not.

There is no ambiguity that section 302 PPC
provides punishment of Qatl-i-amd, whereas section 300 PPC

defines Qatl-i-amd, which reads as follow:
9

Qatl-e-Amd: Whoever, with the intention of causing death or
with the intention of causing bodily injury to a person, by
doing an act which in the ordinary course of nature is likely to
cause death, or with-the knowledge that his act is so
imminently dangerous that it must in all probability cause
death, causes the death of such person, is said to commit gatl-

e-amd.

11. We are to explain that how an unborn baby
becomes a person. In the first place, foetus is another life in
the woman and it transforms in to a baby in the course of time.
Though foetus grows in the body of the woman, but cannot be
equated to or considered to be a part of the body of the
woman. In fact, loss of the foetus consequent upon the death
of the pregnant woman is actually loss of a child in-the-offing
for the husband of the woman. Admittedly, in this case, the
cephalic foetus was found in the womb of the deceased aging
39 weeks, whereas, normally, a human pregnancy lasts for 40
weeks maximum. The death of the deceased led to the death of
an unborn child in the womb of the deceased who was near to
be delivered had she not been killed, and as such it had

qualified to be called a person.

12. It is pertinent to mention that the doctor while

preparing the postmortem report has referred the term
10

“Cephalic Foetus”. Medically, the cephalic refers to the
position of foetus in mother’s uterus, as the end of the
pregnancy approaches, the foetus starts to move and positions
itself for birth. This typically involves flipping over so that the
baby is head down in the womb and starts to move down in
the uterus, preparing to go through birth canal culminating in
the childbirth, when so, we lurk no doubt in our mind that at
the time of death of the deceased the foetus was a complete
child who too lost his life and his killing can only and only be
taken as the killing of a person, whereas Section 338-C PPC
refers to foetus whose some organs are developed and some to
develop, so in this eventuality, the exact section of law should
have been 302 PPC and not 338-C of the Pakistan Penal Code.
To be more accurate, we would like to seek guidance from the

Holy Quran.

13. It will be relevant to mention few of the Verses from
Surah Al-Muminoon particularly Ayat No.12 to 14, which

define the stages of life in the mother’s womb:

i dite Ge Gulf UH Sal
€) ¥}oak
3) aR Abbagi i ous abel

be <3 Laks aac: iy wayne ft is a

>

GV) Cage) Gud) al dui

Ati Ni Sb AbibileF IA tay 1 6a A

WI pi teow OSA Awe (e-deil jun

He WAU Meh

14. The Holy Quran Maintained that when a foetus reaches

to the seventh stage then another creature comes into

existence.

ii.

iii.

vi.

Vii.

Man We did create from a quintessence of clay;

Then We placed him as (a drop of) sperm (nutfa)

in a place of rest firmly fixed;

Then We made the sperm into a clot of congealed

blood (alaqa);

Then of that clot We made a (foetus) lump
(mudgha);

Then We made out of that lump bones;
And clothed the bones with flesh;

Then We developed of it ‘another creation’

(Khalgan’ aakhar).
15. Here at the seventh stage i.e. Khalqan Aakhar (98) til)
refers to another creature in shape of a complete human being.
In the present case too, the child was complete as it was the
39th week of his existence in the mother’s womb, so
undoubtedly, it was Khalaqan Aakhar, at the final stage of
human life. The Holy Quran further explains in Surah Ghafir,

Ayat No.67, in the following words:

tax ot 4s { Px 3) oh née sh | 3 fea Fe
\ 34 W3% ze 4 26 7% |
pals; ds Os Os ot Ce BSin5

Ps AN BE ie k (LOG L ZR eIgs
BM2KIFA Glne FN FAN
Jalete ridtea UP bfulnLen eli Asx

Fb Seine G OP os (Ler)

16. As the Holy Quran provides a complete code of life and
it tells the way that how human being comes into existence
and that how it remains in the mother’s womb and after its
delivery sees the light of the day. The situation has beautifully
been dealt with by Allah Almighty in Ayat No.5 of Surah-Al-

Hajj, which reads as follow:
PA whe 4 4 g Jt
64 oh) i AIS OL Coll Le
2 ols Zu el2is 1% al
wey Uw ae
4277. 8 oe 48 2 Be mse fe

AOGFL Pn bhEZgaLe LEAS)
JiASy Be Nha’ (Kain OF
dat MeerS? Abie i ASP Bote
SP FPF Ber Sf Prate
Lp SEAMEN E Lose LLP soe Li tee

te

According to Post-mortem report, the foetus had

completed its stages of Nutfa and Alaga etc in the womb and
now it was a cephalic foetus which was positioning and
preparing to go through the birth canal, and as such, it was a
complete & separate soul inside the womb of the deceased,
who too was done to death. Similar to all of the divinely
revealed books, the Qur’an unequivocally sanctifies human
life, killing of the children and any innocent person,

irrespective of their age or religious orientation, is condemned

in the firmest language in Ayat No.151 of Sura Al-Anaam:

Yi pile Kis aa te dil 15s os
AS) Calls UES 4: 18

Pa

14

a
3S 5G

CAS TU Ga
Gian! sll gigi V5 GAUL 2
igh 5 Ghi lag ele Je |

aSis oan Ys aN 4 4 3 Gil cali

Borgede a seS a4, amt ot tit SDSL

(eWtir Aric une SNe i74fe

(Lefer ech Ubulto LP bie ler L

Sod Lune (at L) Sabb ly ESL

bus cb bE dee ue Ouse folalse BE

Lief PL PS LD ues withanLoey

(eK aOR tte FleP eb/7

ra FP Seet Ati” wb
18. Similarly, one such example can be found in Ayat

No.31 of Surah, Al-Isra of the Holy Quran:

GAS Cala) Ags and SY 5s Ys

ths US ss O} aus Hass

Shahn LAS oP a SL SiG al

eer 4 Woh Uf BAU diGF
19. In both Ayat No.31 of Surah-Al-Isra, and Ayat No.151
of Sura-Al-Anaam, the prohibition on killing of Children
means, killing of children before their birth. Hence, the above

Verses of the Holy Quran left no ambiguity by calling a foetus

15

a Child. When tested in the light of what has been stated
above, it can safely be hold that a foetus has been recognized
as a child in the Holy Quran to which we cannot doubt, more
particularly, when it has completed 39 weeks of its existence
and as such it has a separate soul whose killing will invite

punishment under section 302 PPC.

20. The matter does not end here rather we would like to
travel a little longer in order to understand that when human
being comes into existence. In the Books of Sahih-Ahadith
this period is generally recognized as 120 days after
conception, at which time, according to the Hadith, the
process of “ensoulment’ occurs i.e. the time, in which, the soul
(rah) enters the foetus post-conception. In this respect
reference can be made to Hadith No.549, Volume-IV, Book-
55 of the Sahih Al-Bukhari, which guides us in the following
manner:

cel Us (ase ee {ae Wiha"

a5 EMSC (As Gis 1 Gx
dul arty) is caitl Me he
oe "4 G5 staal Gaal Dh 3 x

ad as he fal bs & ere
Sw Cag 3 <3 cA ihe Sete’ datas (9S

Bd

ale LAKE las ai 3h Khe ail

. wwe

\

‘eo

16

daa 365 af eave 48

A US Le Ss SU PE

Ligh ale sk e158 dis

Jal (Sass Jad GAS Gly Ad

Y) lalis Ath GK be is ish

(Sana an agle (Guug8 cevent 159
mG) Jawa xa SH al das

Narrated Abdullah: Allah's Apostle, the true
and truly inspired said, "(as regards your
creation), every one of you is collected in the
womb of his mother for the first forty days, and
then he becomes a clot for another forty days,
and then a piece of flesh for another forty days.
Then Allah sends an angel to write four words:
He writes his deeds, time of his death, means of
his livelihood, and whether he will be wretched
or blessed (in religion). Then the soul is
breathed into his body. So, a man may do deeds
characteristic of the people of the (Hell) Fire,
so much so that there is only the distance of a
cubit between him and it, and then what has
been written (by the angel) surpasses, and so
he starts doing deeds characteristic of the
people of Paradise and enters Paradise.
Similarly, a person may do deeds characteristic
of the people of Paradise, so much so that there
is only the distance of a cubit between him and

it, and then what has been written (by the

17

angel) surpasses, and he starts doing deeds of
the people of the (Hell) Fire and enters the
(Hell) Fire.

21. Similarly, the Hadith No.550 in the above-quoted book
of Sahih-Al-Bukhari, further guides us to understand the life

in the mother’s womb:

3 Aigl 88 fe 3
dl a) dlls ob Gull be sail
OS 9 3 ail &) "OE cat) ye - dic
Aah G5 G Optid Ele an itl 95

fa Asia’ O15 U G <aile 0}

al 284) 225 6 08 Yas BI ali
sedges lens

Narrated Anas bin Malik: The Prophet # said,
"Allah has appointed an angel in the womb,
and the angel says, '0 Lord! A drop of
discharge (i.e. of semen), O Lord! a clot, O
Lord! a piece of flesh.' And then, if Allah
wishes to complete the child's creation, the
angel will say. 'O Lord! A male or a female? O
Lord! wretched or blessed (in religion)? What

will his livelihood be? What will his age be?'

18

The angel writes all this while the child is in the

womb of its mother."

22. From the above quoted versus of the Holy Quran as
well as Sahih Ahadith, we have no doubt left in our mind that
after the stage of mudgha (4#4), the Allah Almighty blesses
soul in the foetus and also writes down his/her fate. From this
stage onward, the development towards Khalqan Aakhar aid)
(Al starts. Hence, we are firm in our view that accused killed

two innocent souls one the mother and second the child.

23. The matter came up for hearing before the worthy Sindh
High Court, where the matter was heard at a considerable
length and ultimately, the Learned High Court was pleased to
hold that the trial Court went in error while resorting to section
338-C PPC. The observations were rendered in its reported
judgement titled ‘Hakim Ali Vs. The State’ (2013 YLR 2169)
had held that:

“Accused had committed double murder, of

his wife and an unborn son of about 7/8

months in the brutal manner, which act of

accused was highly condemnable and

required strict punishment.”

Similarly, the Lahore High Court, in the case of “Zaman

Shah Vs. The State” (2015 MLD 795) held that:

19

“In sequel to what has been discussed above
this Court has arrived at an irresistible
conclusion that during the occurrence not
only Mst. Noor Bibi lost her life rather a
male child of 7 months also met unnatural
death and his death in the above scenario is
beyond the provisions of section 338-C,
P.P.C. Hence, conviction/sentence recorded
by the learned trial court under section 338-
C, P.P.C, is not maintainable in the eyes of

law.”

24. A bare perusal of Section 222(1) Cr.P.C. reveals that the
charge shall contain such particulars as to the time and place
of the alleged offence, and the person (if any) against whom,
or the thing (if any) in respect of which, it was committed, as
are reasonably sufficient to give the accused notice of the
matter with which he is charged. In this regard the august
Supreme Court of Pakistan has provided ample guidance in
the case titled “S.A.K. Rehmani Vs. The State” (2005 SCMR
364) which runs as under:
“The whole object of framing a
charge is to enable the defence to
concentrate its attention on the case that he
has to meet, and if the charge is framed in
such a vague manner that the necessary
ingredients of the offences with which the

accused is convicted is not brought out in

the charge, then the charge is defective”.

Ww 20

The apex court in the above mentioned

judgment further clarifies,

“In other words it can be said that
the main object of framing of charge is to
ensure that the accused had sufficient
notice of the nature of accusation with
which he was charged and secondly to make
the Court concerned conscious regarding
the real points in issue so that evidence

could be confined to such points”.

We would like to reproduce another Para of the
above quoted judgment which resolves the controversy we are

facing with, in the following words,

“Where a person is convicted of an
offence and the Appellate Court is of the
view that he has been misled in his, defence
by the absence of a charge or by an error in
the charge, appropriate action can be taken
including remand of the case with direction
for making suitable amendment in the

charge”.

While deriving wisdom from the guidance
provided in the SAK Rehmani’s case (supra), we are not
hesitant to hold that the learned trial Court fell in error while
framing the charge under section 338-C PPC, instead section
302 PPC, as a cephalic child comes within the definition of a

person. Needless to mention that framing of the charge under

21

section 338-C PPC is a material error and the accused/
appellant was thereby misled by such omission to defend
himself and we cannot hold otherwise, but that the

accused/appellant has been prejudiced.

25. For and in view of the above, the conviction awarded to
the appellant under Section 338-C PPC is not maintainable,
therefore, we allow the instant criminal appeal, set aside the
impugned conviction and sentence awarded to the appellant
vide judgment dated 31.10.2019, and remand the case back to
the learned trial court for de novo trial after framing charge
under Section 302 PPC instead of 338-C PPC to meet the ends
of justice. Since the impugned judgment has been set aside, so
the Murder Reference No.09-B of 2019 is answered in
negative, and the appellant shall be treated as under-trial
prisoner. We do expect that the learned trial Court may
conclude the case within a period of four months after

receiving the case-file.

26. So far as the appeal of appellant with regard to his
conviction under Section 15-Arms Act is concerned, as the
appellant has filed this single appeal from Jail, questioning his
convictions in both the cases registered u/s 302 r/w 338-C
PPC and 15-Arms Act, therefore, his appeal to the extent of

conviction under section 15-AA, is adjourned till conclusion

we 22

of the de novo trial in the instant case by the learned trial
Court and the same would be restored at the proper time/stage

through an application submitted by the either side.

27. Above are the reasons of our short order of the
even date.
Announced.
Dt: 18.01.2021 q\
*Auam/PS*

J

JUDGE
76] 271 —
(D.B)
Hon’ble Ms. Justice Musarrat Hilali
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Sahibzada Asadullah
SCANNED
1.5 MAR 2024

alid Khan

