Judgment Sheet

PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, PESHAWAR.
(JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT)
Cr.A.No.1435-P/2019.

JUDGMENT

Date of hearing = ------ 10.01.2023.

Appellant by --- M/s Abdul Latif Afridi, Noor Alam Khan
& Faqir Ullah Awan Advocates.

State/ANF by --- Mr.Muhammad Wagas Khan Chamkani,
Special Prosecutor.

S_M_ATTIQUE SHAH, _J:- This criminal

appeal is directed against the judgment
dated 15.11.2019 of the learned Judge
Special Court, Peshawar delivered in case
FIR No.05 dated 14.05.2017 under sections
6, 9 (c), 14 & 15 of the Control of Narcotic
Substances Act, 1997 registered at Police
Station ANF, OD.I.Khan whereby the
appellant has been convicted and
sentenced to imprisonment for life with a
fine of Rs.200,000/- or in default whereof to
further suffer simple imprisonment for one
year, however, benefit of section 382-B
Cr.P.C was extended to the appellant/
convict.

2. As per prosecution case, on

14.05.2017, complainant Muhammad Asad
Abbas, SI, (P.W-2) along with other police
contingent while present near CRBC Canal
Indus Highway during Nakabandi received
information qua smuggling of huge quantity
of narcotics by drug peddlers Atta Ullah
(appellant) and Abdur Rehman to
Baluchistan through a white colour motorcar
Toyota Corolla bearing registration No.ASH-
175 whereupon the Nakabandi was further
tightened. At about 0015 hours, the said
motorcar came there, which was stopped
and two persons found sitting in the vehicle
were overpowered. On query driver of the
motorcar disclosed his name as Atta Ullah
(appellant) while the person sitting on the
front seat disclosed his name as Abdur
Rehman. On search, the complainant
recovered 30 packets of charas from CNG
Cylinder/Tank of the car. On weighment, the
charas turned out to be of 32 Kgs. The
seizing officer separated necessary samples
from the recovered stuff for the purpose of
chemical analysis while rest of the case
property was sealed in a separate parcel.
On the basis of ibid recovery, instant case

was registered against the appellant.
3. After completion of investigation,
complete challan against the appellant was
submitted before the learned trial Court,
which indicted the accused for the offence
to which he pleaded not guilty. In order to
prove its case, prosecution examined 04
witnesses, whereafter statement of the
accused was recorded wherein he
professed his innocence. After conclusion of
the trial, the learned trial court while
appreciating the evidence in its wisdom had
found the appellant guilty of the charge and
whilst recording his conviction sentenced
him as mentioned above, whereagainst he
has filed the instant appeal.

4, Heard. Record perused.

5. This being an appeal court is
under legal obligation to re-assess and
examine the evidence and material available
on record of the case to arrive at a just
conclusion regarding the conviction and
sentence of the appellant and also to see
whether the learned trial court has properly
appreciated the evidence in its true
perspective while convicting the appellant.

6. Case of the prosecution is that 32

Kg Charas was recovered from the CNG
Cylinder/Tank of the motorcar so concealed
by the present appellant and; co-accused
Abdul Rehman (proclaimed offender) therein.
7. The prosecution in support of its
case has examined 04 P.Ws. P.W-2, SI
Muhammad Asad Abbas complainant/
Seizing Officer of the case has stated that
after cursory interrogation about the
narcotics both the accused after some
hesitation admitted/ disclosed the presence
of narcotics secretly concealed in the CNG
cylinder of the motorcar. “After their
disclosure | opened the CNG cylinder with
the help of tools in the presence of witnesses
and on the pointation of the accused and on
checking the packets of narcotics were seen
inside the CNG cylinder. After their
disclosure on the spot, | prepared the
pointation memo Ex.P.W 2/1 on the spot in
the presence of witnesses and accused and
also prepared the site plan Ex.PW 2/2 as
there was dark and due to security reasons,
proceedings on the spot were difficult. So for
the said reasons, the vehicle in question
along with narcotics, both the accused and
raiding party came to the police station and

in the presence of witnesses and on the
pointation of both the accused, the vehicle in
question was thoroughly checked and
inspected and the CNG tank was opened
and I recovered 20 packets of charas duly
wrapped with yellow solution tape”. This P.W
has not only in his examination-in-chief but
also in his cross-examination admitted that
the recovery memo Ex.P.W.2/3 was
prepared in the police station, which clearly
suggest that the recovery memo Ex.P.W.2/3
had not been prepared at the spot where the
contraband was seized after cutting the CNG
cylinder by the complainant with tools, which
has created a serious doubt in the
prosecution case as it is well settled that
recovery memo must be prepared at the spot
at the time of detecting and seizing the
contraband. Abdul Basit Vs. The State
(2018 SCMR 1425). Indeed, it is not
appealable to a prudent mind that the
complainant along with the seizing party was
present at the spot at 0015 hours, having
information of alleged smuggling of the
narcotics through motorcar but still failed to
make necessary arrangements qua light and;
proper security, which is beyond

comprehension in view of peculiar facts and
circumstances of the case. This P.W has
also stated that he had handed over the case
property to the Moharrar, however, in the
same breath he has admitted in his cross-
examination that the extract of register-19 is
not available on file. He has also admitted it
correct that on judicial file he has not placed
any document in support of safe custody of
the case property. He has further admitted
that the extract of Raseed-e-Rahdari is also
not available on judicial file.

8. P.W-3, CT Muhammad Bilal Afzal
has also stated that after the disclosure of
the narcotics by the accused the
complainant/l.O opened the CNG cylinder
with the help of tools in his presence and on
pointation of the accused and upon checking
the CNG Cylinder narcotics packed in
plackets were seen inside the said cylinder.
He also admitted that the complainant/I.O
has prepared the pointation memo
Ex.P.W.2/1 and site plan Ex.P.W.2/2 on the
spot in presence of the witnesses. The
testimony of this P.W also suggests that no
recovery memo was prepared at the spot by
the complainant/l.O despite opening of the

CNG cylinder/tank with the help of tools,
which is indeed serious lapse on the part of
the seizing officer. Record further suggests
that the occurrence had shown taken place
at 0015 hours whereas the FIR was lodged
in the police station by the complainant at
300 hours and the record is silent in respect
of the safe custody of the recovered
contraband right from 00:15 to 300 hours.

9. P.W-1 is the Moharrar who has
stated that the representative samples were
handed over to him by P.W-2 complainant
which were entered in register No.19 and
was deposited in the Malkhana, however, in
his cross-examination he admitted it correct
that extract of register No.19 is not available
on the judicial file. He has further stated that
“| do not remember the serial number of
entry made in register No.19 regarding the
case property”. He has also stated that he
has sent the representative samples to the
FSL, however, he has candidly admitted in
his cross-examination that extract of Raseed-
e-Rahdari is not available on judicial file.

10. As of now, it is well settled that in
the case of narcotics, prosecution is under
bounden duty to establish its case through

an unbroken chain qua safe transmission of
the recovered contraband and; samples from
Spot to PS for its safe custody in Malkhana
and; onward transmission of said samples to
the FSL for its chemical examination and;
any break in the said chain would materially
affect the case of prosecution qua safe
custody and transmission to the FSL.
Mst.Sakina Ramzan Vs. The State (2021
SCMR 451), Qaiser Javed Khan Vs. The
State (PLD 2020 SC 57) and Amjad Ali Vs.
The State (2012 SCMR 577). No doubt P.W-
1 (Moharrar) has stated that he had received
representative samples from  P.W-2,
however, prosecution could not prove such
stance of P.W-1 as the extract of register
Nos.19 & 21 could neither be placed on
record of the case nor could so produced
before the learned trial court by the
prosecution. Besides, no justifiable reason or
explanation could be forwarded qua its non-
production before the court by the
prosecution. The production of register
Nos.19 & 21 along with Rahdari receipts was
imperative for the prosecution being an
important piece of evidence qua safe custody
and transmission of the representative

samples for its chemical examination to the
FSL and; indeed its non-production before
the learned trial court has created serious

dent in the case of prosecution. Zubair Khan

Vs. The State (2021 SCMR 492). Mere
entering into witness box by the P.W and
Stating that he has received the
representative samples is not sufficient for
maintaining the conviction under capital
charge when important piece of evidence
was withheld by the prosecution.

11. No doubt a huge quantity of
narcotics has been shown recovered from
motorcar, however, mere recovery of huge
quantity is not sufficient for maintaining
conviction under capital charge unless and;
until the same is established beyond a
reasonable doubt through cogent evidence.
Indeed it is not necessary that there should
be many circumstances creating doubts in
the case of prosecution, rather a single
circumstance creating reasonable doubt in a
prudent mind about guilt of an accused
makes him entitle to its benefit not as a
matter of grace or concession but as a right.
Khalid Mehmood Vs. The State (2011

SCMR 664), Tahir Khan Vs. The State
10

(2011 SCMR 646) and Muhammad Islam

Vs. The State (2011 SCMR 820).

12. It is settled that conviction under
capital charge can only be maintained when
prosecution is able to produce before the
court evidence of unimpeachable character,
which is certainly not the case here.

13. Coming to the contention of
learned Special Prosecutor for ANF that the
learned defence counsel had admitted and;
confirmed the chain of events from the
mouth of P.Ws while cross-examining them.
Suffice it to say that it is long been settled
that in a criminal case an accused is not
bound by the admissions made by his
counsel while cross-examining the P.Ws.
Abdul Khaliq Vs. The State (1996 SCMR
1553). Therefore, prosecution cannot get
any benefit and premium from the alleged
admissions/conformations.

14. Upon reappraisal of the evidence
and material available on record of the case
we are of the view that the learned trial court
has not properly appreciated the evidence
and material available on record of the case

while rendering the impugned findings of
11

conviction and sentence of the accused-
appellant.

15. In view thereof, the instant
appeal is allowed, the impugned judgment
of the learned trial Court dated 15.11.2019
is set aside and; appellant Atta Ullah is
acquitted of the charge leveled against him.
He is in custody, be released forthwith if not
otherwise required or wanted in any other
criminal case.

16. Above are the detailed reasons

for our earlier short order of even date.

Announced.
Dt. 10/01/2023.

HON’BLE MR.JUSTICE ISHTIAQ IBRAHIM &
HON’BLE MR.JUSTICE § M ATTIQUE SHAH

(AVK-KHAN Court Secretary)
