1

JUDGMENT SHEET
git IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
MINGORA BENCH (DAR-UL-QAZA), SWAT
(Judicial Department)

Cr.M B.A No. 878-M/2022
Ameer Badshah.......ssscsesssssesssereosesenee (Petitioner)

vs

The State & another.....................(Respondents)

Present: Mr. Abdul Halim Khan, Advocate for the
petitioner.

Mr. Saeed Ahmad, Asst:A.G for the
State.

Mr. Ikramuliah Khan (Jandool),
Advocate for the complainant.

Date of hearing: 02.12.2022
JUDGMENT

Dr. Khurshid Iqbal, J.-

1. The instant bail petition has been moved

by Ameer Badshah, arrested in a case registered vide

y FIR No. 193, on 09.09.2022, u/ss. 376/511/34/354,
ep PPC, read with section 46(5) of the Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa Mental Health Act, 2017, at Police

Station Samarbagh, District Dir Lower. He seeks his

post arrest bail.

2. Allegation against the petitioner/ accused
is that he, alongwith other co-accused, attempted rape
of Mst. Mashroqa, sister of the complainant, in the

field of maize crops, situated in Nawo Koto, within the

Abdul Sabooh {S.B.) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Dr. Khurshid Iqbal
2

criminal jurisdiction of Police Station Samarbagh, Dir

Lower.

3. I have heard arguments of learned counsel
for the parties and the learned Assistant Advocate

General, for the State and perused the record.

4, The petitioner/accused has been directly
charged in the FIR by the complainant/ brother of the
victim for attempted rape. The victim is admittedly a
mentally ill person. The record shows that the
petitioner/accused was not alone but accompanied by
two other persons. They made a clear attempt of rape
by stepping off her clothes in a maize field, and it was
her hue and cry that the petitioner/accused ran away
from the spot. The mere fact that the victim has not
been examined, does not appear to be a worth
consideration ground for the grant of bail. The reason
obviously is that there is a prima facie case of
attempted rape against the petitioner/accused. The
record also shows that the victim was taken away in a
rickshaw to the place of the occurrence. It is worth
observing that attempt of a mentally ill person
reasonably connect the petitioner/accused with the
commission of the offence in hand. There is sufficient
case law on the definition of attempt to commit an

offence. In Muhammad Aslam v. The State (PLD

Abdul Sabooh (S.B.) Hon’ble Mr. Justice Dr. Khurshid Iqbal
3
1985 Federal Shariat Court 282), the Hon’ble

Federal Shariat Court has exhaustively discussed the
term “attempt” by referring to several law dictionaries
and cases from Pakistan and India. For the sake of
brevity, | would reproduce the relevant paragraph from

Halsbury’s Laws of England, Vol. II, 4" Edition:

“64. Acts constituting attempt—An attempt is
any over act immediately connected with the
commission of an offence and forming part of
a series of acts which, if not interrupted or
frustrated or abandoned, would result in the
commission of the completed offence. Acts
remotely leading towards the commission of
an offence cannot constitute an attempt; the
acts must be immediately connected with the
offence. An act done preparatory to the
commission of an offence is not sufficiently
proximate; and it is not an attempt merely to
procure materials with which to commit the
offence.”

The Hon’ble Court concluded as under:

“It is thus well-settled now that there are
several stages or ingredients for the
commission of an offence. The first and the
basic ingredient is the intention or mens rea
to commit such offence which
is the mental process which can be judged or
gathered from the surrounding
circumstances. The second stage is of
preparation which consists in devising or
arranging the means or measures necessary
for the commission of the offence. After the
preparation and _ before’ the actual
commission of the offence is the stage of
attempt i.e., performance of some over-acts
which if not interrupted or frustrated or
abandoned would result in the commission of
the completed offence. However, there is very
thin line between an attempt and actual
commission of offence.”

Abdu! Sabooh (S.B.) Hon’ble Mr. Justice Dr. Khurshid Iqbal
SS

4

5. Similarly, in a 1983 case titled as Ghulam
Haider v. The State reported as 1983 SCMR 842, the
Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan held that catching
hold of breast of a woman and removing her Shalwar
by a male attacker and the removal of the loin-cloth of
the male attacker himself would amount to clear
indications of the attacker’s intention to commit rape.
While emphasizing this aspect in the perspective of

Islamic teaching, the Hon’ble Court observed:

“In our society which we claim to be Islamic,
catching hold of the breast of a woman and
removing her Shalwar as well as the removal
of the loin-cloth of the male assailant are
clear indications of the assailant to commit
sexual intercourse with the victim and
therefore offence would fall under section 18
read with section 10 of the Ordinance and not
under section 354, P.P.C.”

As already noted above in the instant case,
the petitioner/accused has been charged alongwith two
other accused for having taken the victim, who is also
admittedly a mentally ill person, to a field, where he
stepped her naked and touched her body, which clearly

indicates an attempt to rape.

6. As far as the delay in registration of the
case is concerned, the same has been duly explained.
As such, it is not fatal to the case of prosecution.
Reliance is placed on Imtiaz v. The State (1978 P Cr.

LJ 470). Needless to say, the petitioner/accused has

Abdul Sabooh (S.B.) Hon’ble Mr. Justice Dr. Khurshid Iqbal
5

made pointation of the place of the occurrence.
Furthermore, the rickshaw, in which the victim was
taken to the place of the occurrence, is the ownership
of the petitioner/accused, the registration documents of
which were produced by one Hazrat Bilal. In such
circumstances, reasonable grounds exist which
tentatively connect the petitioner/accused with the

commission of the offence in hand. In Arbab Ali v.

Khamiso and others (1985 SCMR 195), august the

Supreme Court observed:

“There are certain other features also in
this case, which have not been attended
in the High Court before giving a
verdict that was a case of "further
inquiry". It needs to be clarified that
bail can be allowed (in a case otherwise
allegedly falling under the prohibition
contained in subsection (1) of section
467) under subsection (2) of section 487,
Cr.P.C. when there are sufficient
grounds, for further inquiry into the
guilt of the accused but only on the
condition when the Police Officer or the
Court at any stage of investigation,
inquiry or trial, as the case may be,
comes to a definite conclusion that there
are no reasonable grounds for believing
that the accused has committed a non-
Bailable offence. Without this finding
bail cannot be allowed under subsection
(2) on mere ground that there are
sufficient grounds of further inquiry.”

7. In view of the above, the instant bail

petition is dismissed. The observations recorded

hereinabove are purely tentative in nature and should,

Abdu! Sabooh (S.B.) Hon'ble Mr, Justice Dr. Khurshid Iqbal
6

in no way, prejudice an independent mind of the

learned trial Court during the course of trial.

Announced
Dt: 02.12.2022

Abdu! Sabooh (S.B.) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Dr. Khurshid Iqbal

3 fice wiR
oir
