Z

oe

Judgment Sheet
PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, PESHAWAR.

JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT

Cr. M/BCA No.708-P/2020.
JUDGMENT
Date of hearing... cece ceecen cee LIVOG/202 1 oe sec cec cece ete tence ees
Petitioner’s (Mst. Naveeda) By Mr. Munsif Saeed, Advocate.
Respondent (Mehtab respondent No.2) By Mr. Muhammad Sajid Khan,

Advocate.
(State) By Miss. Sophia Noreen, AAG.
S M ATTIQUE SHAH. J:- This single order shall

dispose of the instant bail cancellation petition icc BCA No.708-P/2020
and; Criminal Revision No.34-P/2020, both; being so filed by Mst.
Naveeda against the bail granting order dated 15.02.2020 passed by the
learned Additional Sessions Judge-I, Lahore Swabi, whereby post arrest
bail was granted to accused-respondent Mehtab and; the case/trial was
adjourned till the arrival and appearance of the complainant for recording
his evidence.

2. The brief and essential facts of the prosecution case, as
reported in the FIR, is that on 23.02.2013 complainant Mian
Qasim Shah charged the accused-respondent Mehtab for

committing the murder of his cousin Azam Shah.
3. Heard. Record perused.

4. Perusal of record reveals that on merit the concession of
bail was refused to the accused-respondent Mehtab up to this
Court. After the commission of offence, the accused-respondent
remained fugitive from law; however, on 22.11.2018 he was
arrested in the present case and; after completion of
investigation, supplementary challan against him was submitted
before the Court. Formal charge against the accused-respondent
was framed, to which he did not plead guilty and claimed trial.
During the trial, the prosecution examined Mushtaq Hussain
ASI (PW-1), who is marginal witness to the pointation memo
(EX PW 1/1), recovery memo (EX PW 1/2) vide which the
accused produced one 30 bore pistol alongwith fixed charger
containing five live rounds of the same bore to the I.O, Dr.
Akhtar Ali Shah (PW-2) who conducted autopsy on the dead
body of the deceased, Ghani Said Khan Inspector (PW-3) who
on the report of complainant registered case FIR (EX PA),
Saadi Khan SI (PW-4) who arrested the accused, Shehzad Khan

SI (PW-5), Farooq Zaman Inspector (PW-6) who conducted
investigation in the case, Mian Akhtar Munir (PW-7) who is
marginal witness to recovery memos and; Asir Shah (PW-8)
who identified the dead body of the deceased before the doctor
as well as before the police. Out of total 17 prosecution
witnesses, eight witnesses have been examined; but, the star
witness of the prosecution is the complainant namely Mian
Qasim Shah, who was summoned time and again; however, he
failed to appear before the Court and; according to the report,
he had gone abroad for earning his livelihood and as such there
was no hope of his appearance before the Court and; recording
his evidence in the near future. Thereafter, non-bailable
warrants of arrest were issued against the complainant; but,
even then, he could not be produced before the Court and; upon
the request of prosecution the case was adjourned so many
times. Even the prosecution finally showed it inability to
produce the complainant before the Court for recording his
statement. It needs to be mentioned that indeed the complainant
is the sole eye witness of the occurrence and; therefore, his

appearance and recording of his statement is utmost important
for the case of prosecution. Certainly, right from the date of his
arrest i.e 22.11.2018 the accused-respondent is behind the bars
and; also there is no hope of appearance and recording the
statement of the complainant, being the star witness of
prosecution, before the Court in the near future. Indeed, an
accused person cannot not be kept behind the bars for an
indefinite period; particularly, when the trial Court is unable to
conclude and decide the fate of the case on account of the
absence of the material evidence of the prosecution.

5. In view of above, the learned trial Court had left with no
other option; but, to adjourn the case sine die, till the arrival and
appearance of the complainant before the Court for recording
his evidence and; thus, has rightly granted the concession of
bail to accused-respondent Mehtab. Upon the arrival and
appearance of the complainant, the case of prosecution could be
resurrected on its application for recording his statement and;
further proceedings therein. The impugned order of the learned
trial Court is the result of proper appreciation of the facts,

circumstances and; the law applicable to the case in hand;
which requires no interference by this Court in the present
petitions. Hence, the bail cancellation application and Criminal

Revision; being devoid of merits are hereby dismissed.

Announced,

Dated.14.06.2021 ucrneter
GE

(S.B of)

Hon’ble Mr. Justice S M Attique Shah.

(K.Ali P.S)
