JUDGMENT SHEET

PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, PESHAWAR
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT

{ JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT]
Cr.A No. 354-P/2018.
Sajid Vs The State and another

Date of hearing 02.11.2021

Appellant (by) ___Mr, Shabbir Hussain Gigyani, Advocate
Complainant (by) _Mr. Ali Zaman, Advocate
State (by) Mr. Arshad Ahmad, Addl. A.G

JUDGMENT

MUSARRATHILALL J.- This criminal appeal has been
directed against the judgment dated 24.03.2018 of the
learned Sessions Judge/Judge on Special Task,
Peshawar, delivered in case FIR No.734, dated
01.08.2015, registered under Section 302 PPC, at Police
Station, Chamkani, District Peshawar, whereby the
appellant has been convicted and sentenced u/s 302 (b)
PPC to imprisonment for life, besides payment of
Rs. 2,00,000/-, as compensation under section 544-A
Cr.P.C to the legal heirs of deceased, recoverable as
arrears of land revenue or in default thereof shall further
undergo six months SI. Benefit under Section 382-B

Cr.P.C. was extended to him.

2. The case of prosecution, as per contents of the
FIR, is that on 31.07.2015 Zabita khan in injured
condition lodged a report to Tahir Hussain ASI (PW-7)
in a casualty room of LRH, Peshawar, to the effect that
on the eventful day, he was present in a Cricket
playground, situated at Rano Garhi, near motorway
bypass, when at 16.15 hours Sajid, the appellant, made
firing at him, due to which he was hit and sustained
injury on his right side beneath armpit, and, thereafter,
he was shifted by a passerby, Shahzada, to the hospital,
however, he disclosed no motive for the commission of
the offence, accordingly, the above referred case FIR
Exh.PW 8/1 was registered against the appellant.

3. Investigation of the case was entrusted to Anwar
Khan SI (PW-6), who visited the spot, prepared the site
plan, Exh.PB, of his own. He also took into possession
blood stained garments of the deceased vide recovery
memo Exh.PW 4/1. Later on, the deceased then injured
died and, thus, section 302 PPC was added in the case.
On arrest of the accused Sajid and completion of
investigation, complete challan in terms of section 173
Cr.P.C was submitted. He was sent for trial to the court

of learned Sessions Judge/Judge, on Special Task

Peshawar, where at the commencement of trial, the
prosecution produced nine (09) witnesses. On closure of
the prosecution evidence, the accused-appellant was
examined under section 342 Cr.P.C, wherein he denied
the charges, professed innocence and stated to have
falsely been implicated in the case, however, he was
neither ready to be examined on oath nor wished to
produce defence. The learned trial Court, on conclusion
of the trial, convicted and sentenced the accused-appeal,
vide judgment herein impugned.

4. | Arguments heard and record perused.

5. The entire case of the prosecution is relied upon
the report of the deceased then injured ‘dying
declaration’ made by him in the hospital before Tahir
Hussain ASI (PW-7) and medical report as no other
person came forward to furnish eyewitness account in
the case, therefore, it is to be seen as to whether the
dying declaration rings true and is sound in substance to
be relied upon, whether the deceased then alive at the
time of recording his report before the police could talk
coherently and that he was not prompted by other person

present with him.

6. From perusal of contents of the report, it is evident
that the occurrence took place on 31.07.2015 at 16.15
hours, while report was lodged on the same day at 17.20
hours (though time of report is tampered with), whereas
the FIR was chalked on the following day, ice.,
01.08.2015, at 17.35 hours, after the delay of twenty four
(24) hours, with no explanation. The contents of FIR
further reveal that after registration of the case, it was
handed over to Bukhtiar Khan ASI. Anwar Khan SI,
(PW-6), the investigating officer, in cross examination
admitted that an inquiry was conducted by Bakhtiar khan
ASI. He further admitted that the said inquiry was not
available on record nor he had gone through the said
inquiry report. The above discussed evidence is
suggestive of the fact that the FIR was lodged after
considerable consultations and deliberation and after
conducting preliminary investigation in the case.

7. Moreover, the testimony of the Investigating
officer is also not in line with the contents of report
because he stated in his cross examination that the
occurrence took place in the field of one Waroki Haji
while as per contents of FIR the occurrence took place in

the playground. He further stated that he has investigated

“]

the instant case regarding cricket match and found that
there was cricket match at the relevant time. Similarly,
the report of injured complainant was recorded on
31.07.2015 at 17.20 hours (05.20 p.m), while according
to the medico legal report Exh.PW 9/1, the victim was
brought by Tahir Hussain ASI on 31.07.2015 at 05.00
p.m, while, as per report the injured was brought by one
Shahzada. Tahir Hussain was examined as PW-7, and he
stated in cross examination that the victim was taken by
a passerby and the people who brought the injured to the
hospital were present at the time of scribing the report.
He further stated that the report was not endorsed by the
doctor. Therefore, possibility cannot be ruled out that
name of the appellant might have been shown by the
people present with the deceased then injured at the time
of recording report, thus, in the present scenario, the
dying declaration is not free from doubt.

8. Apart from the above, as per statement of the
Investigating officer, there was a cricket match between
two teams in the playground, therefore, people would
have been present on the spot but none of them was
produced by the prosecution. Similarly, according to the

report of deceased then injured, he was brought by one

©)

Shahzada, but neither his statement was recorded by the
police under section 161 Cr.P.C nor cited him in the
calendar of witnesses nor he was produced before the
trial court for recording his statement, as such, withheld
its best evidence. It is well settled principle of law that if
a best piece of evidence is available with a party and the
same is withheld, then it is presumed that the party has
some sinister motive behind it in not producing the said
evidence, therefore, presumption under illustration (g) to
Article 129 of Qanun-e-Shahadat Order can fairly be
drawn in the case. Likewise, it is established from the
record that neither any empty nor blood was recovered
from the spot and even the I.0 has not verified the site
plan through the injured complainant after his discharge
from the hospital, nor the site plan bears the date of its
preparation, which aspect of the case also creates doubt
in the prosecution story.

9. ‘Dying declaration’ is the statement which is
made by the victim of homicide offences as to cause of
his death. The rule relating to dying declaration and its
admissibility is provided in Article 46 of the Qanun-e-
Shahadat Order, 1984, which says that the statement of

dying man is relevant and admissible in evidence,

however, for recording such declaration no particular
mode has been provided. sub-Article (1) of Article 46 of
the Order, 1984, provides that when the evidence or
statement of a person, who is dead, as in the instant case,
relates to the cause of his death or as to any of the
circumstances of the transaction, which resulted in his
death, such statement becomes relevant and gains
evidentiary value because of the special circumstances
that the person, who made such statement, was no more
alive/available. Now, it has been well settled by the
Hon’ble Supreme Court that ‘dying declaration’ is a
weak type of evidence and is similar to the statement of
an interested witness, therefore, requires close scrutiny
and is not to be believed merely for the reason that dying
person is not expected to tell a lie. In the case titled

Abdur Rahim alias Rahima vs. the State and others

(PLD 2003 SC 662) the august Supreme Court has held
that ‘the law so far developed qua an oral dying
declaration is that it is a weak piece of evidence which
must be corroborated by independent circumstances’. In

another case titled Mst. Zahida Bibi vs. The State

(PLD 2006 SC 255) Hon’able apex court has held that;-

“dying declaration or a statement of a person without the
test of cross-examination is a weak kind of evidence and its
credibility certainly depends upon the authenticity of the
record and the circumstances under which it is recorded,
therefore, believing or disbelieving the evidence of dying
declaration is a matter of judgment but it is dangerous to
accept such statement without careful scrutiny of the
evidence and the surrounding circumstances, to draw a
correct conclusion regarding its truthfulness. The rule of
criminal administration of justice is that the dying
declaration like the statement of an interested witness
requires close scrutiny and is not to be believed merely for

the reason that dying person is not expected to tell lie.”
Same view was also reiterated in the case the

cases titled Farman Ahmed vs. Muhammad _ Inayat

2007 SCMR 1825) Tahir Khan vs. the State (2011
SCMR 646)

10. So far as medical evidence is concerned, it is
settled law that the medical evidence may confirm the
ocular evidence with regards to receipt of injuries, nature
of the injuries, kinds of weapon used in the commission
of offence but it would not connect the accused with the
commission of the offence.

11. On thorough scanning of the record, we are of the
affirm view that the prosecution has miserably failed to
prove its case against the accused-appellant beyond
reasonable doubt. It has been now well settled that

conviction must be based on unimpeachable evidence

and certainty of guilt and any doubt arising in the

prosecution case must be resolved in favour of the

accused, resultantly, while extending benefit of doubt,

we accept the appeal filed by the accused-appellant by

setting aside his conviction and sentences and acquit him

of the charges leveled against him. He be set free

forthwith, if not required in any other case.

Above are the reasons of short order of even date.

Announced
02.11.2021
*M.Zafral P.S* JUD

DGE

(DB) Hon‘ble Mr. Justice Lal Jan Khattak
Hon'ble Justice Musarrat Hilali

a

