JUDGMENT SHEET

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
PESHAWAR
(Judicial Department)

Cr.A. No.341-P/2013

Date of hearing:

Appellant (s) :

Respondent (s) :

JUDGMENT

ASSADULLAH KHAN CHAMMKANTI, J.- Our this

common judgment shall dispose of the instant Criminal
Appeal, filed by appellant-convict Akhtar Muhammad,
Cr.A. No.94-P/2014, titled, “Rehmat Ullah etc Vs the
State” and Cr.A. No.179-P/2014, titled, “Said Jamal alias
Mane etc Vs the State”, as well as Cr.A. No.304-P/2014,
titled, “State Vs Said Jamal ete”, filed by the State for
enhancement of sentence of the convicts, as identical
questions of law are involved in all the three.

2. Instant appeal has been filed by appellant
Akhtar Muhammad against the judgment dated
11.06.2013, rendered by learned Judge Anti-Terrorism
Court-I, Peshawar, whereby he being charge sheeted under
section 365-A PPC read with section 7 (e) ATA, has been
convicted and sentenced to undergo life imprisonment, but

under which section of law or offence, has not been clearly

*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

mentioned in the judgment while co-accused Dunya Gul,
Daud, Israf and Israr, have been declared as Proclaimed
Offenders and perpetual warrants of arrest have been
issued against them.

3. Cr.A. No.94-P/2014 has been filed by
appellants 1. Rehmat Ullah and 2. Fazl-e-Subhan alias
Asad, against the judgment dated 17.01.2014, passed by
learned Judge Anti-Terrorism Court, Mardan, whereby
each of them has been convicted and sentenced under
section 365-A/34 PPC read with S.7 (e) ATA to undergo
imprisonment for life alongwith forfeiture of their
proprieties in favour of the State, whereas co-accused
Bakhtiar alias Sheena and Nawab Ali, have been declared
as Proclaimed Offenders, followed by issuance of
perpetual warrants against them.

4. Cr.A. No.179-P/2014, has been filed by
appellants Said Jamal alias Mane and Rambel, against the
judgment dated 25.03.2014, handed down by learned Judge
Anti-Terrorism Court-II, Peshawar, whereby each of them
has been convicted under section 365-A PPC read with
S. 7 (e) ATA of 1997 and sentenced to undergo life
imprisonment, despite that no charge under section 7 (e)

ATA has been framed against the appellants.

5. In all these appeals, before arguments on
merits of the cases, the following legal points remained
under consideration during the course of arguments:-

i) Whether non-compliance of the provisions of
S.19 (10) against absconding co-accused,
would vitiate the onward proceedings in the
the trial of the arrested accused/ appellants
convicts?

il) Whether the appellants have been confronted
with clear and specific charge by providing
them proper opportunity to defend
themselves or have been prejudiced in their
defence by confronting them with
ambiguous charge-sheets?

ii) Whether the appellants have been convicted
and sentenced in accordance with law or
otherwise?

iv) Whether the offence under section 365-A
PPC, if does not have any nexus with the
object of sections 6, 7 and 8 of the Anti-
Terrorism Act, 1997, will even then be
triable by the Anti Terrorism Court or an
ordinary Court?

6. To answer the first point, we would like to
reproduce §.19 (10) Anti Terrorism Act, 1997 for ready
reference and convenience:-

“19 (10) Any accused person may be tried in
his absence if the Anti Terrorism Court, after
such inquiry as it deems fit, is satisfied that
such absence is deliberate and brought about
with a view of impeding the course of
justice:

Provided that the accused person shall
not be tried under this sub-section unless a
proclamation has been published in respect
of him in at least [in one daily newspaper
including Sindhi language] requiring him to
appear at a specified place within seven days
failing which action may also be taken
against him under section 88 of the Code:

Provided further, that the court shall
proceed with the trial after taking the
necessary steps to appoint an advocate at the
expenses of the State to defend the accused
person who is not before the Court.

Explanation:- An accused who is tried
in his absence under this sub-section shall be
deemed not to have admitted the commission
of any offence for which he has been
charged].

In the first two appeals, some absconding co-accused have
been declared as Proclaimed Offenders, however, they have
not been tried in absentia as contemplated under sub-section
10 of S.19 Anti Terrorism Act 1997, therefore, the point for
determination before us is what would be the effect of
non-compliance of Provisions of sub-section 10 of section
19 of Anti Terrorism Act, on the fate of trial of arrested co-
accused/appellants. Despite our thorough search, we do not
find any case law of the Hon’ble Supreme Court on the
point, however, we have certain judgments of the august
Apex Court and the learned High Courts of the country,
where the cases of the accused tried in absentia have been
dealt with and trial of accused in absentia has been held to
be violative of articles 9 and 10 (1) of the constitution. The
observations of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Paragraph

No.14 of the judgment in case titled, “Mir Ikhlaq Ahmad

and another Vs the State” (2008 SCMR 951) reads as

under:-

“In view of the above, we feel that the trial of
the appellants, in absentia, undertaken by the
Special Judge, Anti Terrorism Court, was
violative of articles 9 and 10 (1) of the
Constitution and section 10(11-A) of the Anti
Terrorism Act, 1997, thus cannot be allowed
to sustain. Furthermore, the appellants were
not afforded any opportunity of hearing and
thus, they were condemned unheard which is
contrary to the principle of natural justice.
We are convinced that the judgments,
convictions and sentences rendered and
awarded by both the Courts, in the absence of
the appellants, to their extent are not
sustainable under the law and violative of the
Constitution and law, which has necessitated
the retrial of the case. Appeal Allowed”.

The august Apex Court has reaffirmed the same view in
case titled, “Arbab Khan Vs the State” (2010 SCMR
755) in the following words:-
“Trial in absentia is violative of Arts.9 and 10
(1) of the Constitution. Condemning of
accused without affording an opportunity of
hearing is also contrary to the principles of
natural justice”
The Hon’ble Lahore High Court has also followed the
view of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in case titled, “The
State Vs Khurram Shahzad and others” (2011 MLD 378)
by holding that “trial of accused in absentia is violative of
articles 9 & 10 (1) of the Constitution and contrary to the
principles of natural justice and as such is not sustainable
under the law”. Similar, is the view of the Hon’ble Sindh

High Court in case titled, “Muhammad Shoaib and other

Vs the State” (2013 MLD 1469), “that trial in absentia

was violative of Arts.10 (1) and 10-A of the Constitution.
Accused had not been afforded an opportunity of being
heard and they were condemned unheard which was
contrary to the principles of natural justice as well. The
case was remanded in the circumstances”. The view of the
august Balochistan High Court in case titled, “Abdul
Majeed Vs the Accountability Judge-I, Quetta and
others” (2012 P Cr. L. J 1647” is also the same.

7. No doubt, the Hon’ble Supreme Court in
authoritative judgment in case titled, “Mehram Ali and
others’ Vs Federation of Pakistan and others” (PLD 1998
Supreme Court 1445), while dilating upon the provisions
of clause (b) of subsection (10) of section 19 Anti
Terrorism Act, has held that it is violative of Article 9 as
well as 10 (1) of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of
Pakistan and thus has no legal effect, but it may be noted
that rest of section 19 was held to be a valid piece of
legislation. In case titled, “Malik Iftikhar Ahmad Vs Ali
Asghar and another’ (PLD 1957 SC (AJ&K) 47, the
august Supreme Court Azada Jammu and Kashmir has

discussed the golden principles of natural justice in these

words:-

“It is not possible to give an exact
definition of the principles of natural justice
as the requirements of natural justice must
depend on the circumstances of each case.

However, some of the important principles
of natural justice violation whereof have
been considered by Courts to be sufficient
grounds for quashing the decision are (i)
that a man cannot be a judge in his own
cause; (ii) that no party is to be condemned
unheard; (iii) that the party must in good
time know the precise case he is to meet;
and (iv) that a party is entitled to know why
a matter has been decided against him. If, in
an action, any one of the principles
enumerated above are not followed, that
action must be struck down. The principle
of ‘audi alteram partem’ i.e. a person
cannot be condemned unheard is a time
honoured principle. Therefore, where an
order to the prejudice of a party is made
without hearing him, as for instance, where
the privilege granted to a person, is
withdrawn without giving a show-cause
notice, the order being bad in law, is to be
ignored and struck down.

Holy Qur’an well recognizes principles
of natural justice. Satan (Iblis) for his
rebellious arrogance and _—_ jealous
disobedience to Command of Allah to bow
down to Adam punished only after being
asked to explain his conduct. Holy Prophet
(peace be upon him) call for explanation of
Hatib before deciding his guilt. Rule of
natural justice stems from Islamic
Jurisprudence and to be complied with as a
command like any other Quranic law”.

8. We are not confronted with the case of the
accused who have been tried as well as convicted and
sentenced in absentia, but we have referred the above
judgments for guidance in the matter, combined study
whereof suggests that trial in absentia is violative of
Articles 9 and 10 (1) of the Constitution, therefore, we are

firm in our view that non-compliance of the provisions of

subsection 10 of section 19 Anti Terrorims Act, against the
absconding co-accused by the learned Trial Courts in the
instant cases, would not vitiate the trial of the appellants.
Besides, under subsection 14 of $.19 Anti Terrorism Act,
the Anti Terrorism Courts have been given powers of a
Court of Sessions for the purpose of trial of any offence,
and shall try such offence as if it were a court of Sessions
as far as may be in accordance with the procedure
prescribed in the Code for trial before a Court of Sessions.
Keeping in view the provisions of subsection 14 of S.19
Anti Terrorism Act,1997, the learned Trial Courts
exercising the powers of Court of Sessions under
subsection 14 of section 19 ATA, have proceeded the
absconding co-accused within the meaning of S.512
Cr.P.C. and have been declared them as Proclaimed
Offenders, followed by issuance of perpetual warrants of
arrest.

9. Now coming to the second point involved in
the case. We would like to first reproduce the charge-sheet
of each case with which the appellants-convicts have been
confronted:-

Cr.A. No.341-Ap/2013.

“That you accused on 28.11.2012 at 1845 hours
within the criminal jurisdiction of Police Station
Pabbi alongwith your absconding co-accused
Dunya Gul, Daud, Israf, Israr and Abdul,

*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

forcibly on gun point abducted Shehzad Noor,
Ishfaq ur Rehman, Awais Muhammad and
Muhammad Noman while they were going in
Shahzad Noor’s motorcar No.BB.2320,
Peshawar, from near GPS Dadar Abad, Dag
Ismail Khel and kept them in_ illegal
confinement in a castle shape house situated in
tribal area. That the abductee families on phone
were asked for ransom. That on receipt of
ransom of sixty lacs from the complainant and
twenty lacs from the other abductees, they were
set free and you thereby committed an offence
punishable under section 365-A PPC read with
section 7 (e) ATA within my cognizance.

Cr.A. No.94-P/2014

That on 07.02.2013 at 05.00 hours, you
accused Rehmatullah and Fazle Subhan
alongwith your absconding co-accused Bakhtiar
alias Sheena and Nawab Ali in the prosecution
of the common object of you all, forcibly
abducted complainant Noor Muhammad in his
motorcar bearing registration
No.XLI.9015/LWG for the purpose of ransom
on pistol point at the abetment and instigation of
your co-accused Birdadar and Fazlur Rehman on
the fasle pretext of taking them from Shumlo
Camp to Torham in lieu of Rs.3200/- as fare on
Gohati Sikandarey road, snatched Nokia mobile
phone set having SIM No.0344-9789729, cash
amount of Rs.10,000/- alongwith registration
copy of the motorcar and kept him in illegal
confinement for 29 days and thereafter release
him on payment of Rs.12,30,000/-. That out of
the ransom amount, you accused Fazle Subhan
alias Asad received your share of Rs.88,000/-
out of which Rs.50,000/- were recovered from
your house on your pointation while
Rs.7,00,000/- were recovered from the house of
you accused Rehmatullah on your pointation
which you had kept for distributing the same
later on. Your this act also created a sense of
fear and insecurity in the society and thereby
committed an offence punishable under section
365-A/149 PPC read with S.7 (e) ATA which is
within the cognizance of this Court.

10

Secondly, that on the same date, time and place
you accused Biradar and Fazlur Rehman abetted
your above named co-accused facing trial and
absconding co-accused for the purpose of
committing the above mentioned offence which
also created a sense of fear and insecurity in the
society and thereby committed an offence
punishable under section 365-A/109 PPC read
with S.7 (e) /21-I ATA and within the
cognizance of this court.

Cr.A. No.179-P/2014.

That on 31./07.2013 in between 06.13 to 1300
hours, near the fields of complainant situated at
Tambal Baz village falling within the criminal
jurisdiction of Police Station Daudzai, you the
above named accused alongwith your other
absconding co-accused namely Ferdos and Sabir
in prosecution of your common intention,
abducted PW Muhammad Umar s/o Mashooqg
Khan (father of complainant) for the purpose of
ransom and further on 16.08.2013 the local
police during raid conduct at your house situated
at village Larama Gulabad, recovered the
abductee from inside your house and you were
arrested from your house. Your aforesaid
offence constitute an offence punishable under
section 365-A/34 PPC which is in the
cognizance of this court.

10. The charge-sheets referred to above in all the
three cases are ambiguous which do not speak specifically
as to under which offence or law the appellants have been
confronted with the charge thereby causing prejudice to the
appellants in their defence. Similarly, the convictions and
sentences of the appellants recorded by the learned Trial
Court in each case, are also on same footing, from which
one cannot ascertain as to under which statute the

appellants have been convicted and sentenced. The

*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

11

thorough perusal of the charge-sheet, in Cr.A. No.341-
P/2013, depicts that it does not specifically determine as to
whether the appellant has been charge sheeted under
section 365-A PPC or section 7 (e) ATA, being framed in a
single head. Similar, is the position of charge-sheet in
Cr.A. No.94-P/2014, wherein the appellants have been
charge sheeted under section 365-A/149 PPC read with
section 7 (e) ATA in single head as well as under section
109 PPC read with S.7 (e)/21-I ATA. Though in Cr.A
No.179-P/2014, the appellants have been rightly charge
sheeted under section 365-A PPC, but wrongly convicted
under section 365-A read with section 7 (e) ATA 1997 as
has had not been confronted with a charge under section
7 (e) ATC. In the above two first appeals, the conviction
and sentences of the appellants are uncertain from which
one cannot determine as to whether the appellants have
been convicted under section 365-A PPC or under the
provisions of Anti Terrorism Act.

11. It is well settled principle of law that charge
against accused shall be specific, fair and clear in all
respects to provide an opportunity to the accused to defend
himself/herself in due course of trial. The charge shall be
clear and by no means, confused to prejudice the accused.

Charge is a precise formulation of specific accusations

12

made against an accused person, who is entitled to know
its nature at the early stage. Its aim is to explain to the
accused as correctly and precisely as well as concisely as
possible the allegations with which the accused is to be
confronted. The charge must convey to the accused with
sufficient transparency and in clear terms what the
prosecution intends to prove against the accused. It shall
contain all essential details as to time, place as well as
specific manner of the alleged offence, the manner in
which the offence was committed with full description of
the accusation so as to afford the accused an opportunity to
explain the accusations with which he is confronted. The
prime object and the principle of framing charge shall be,
to make aware the accused, of the substantive accusations
which are to be proved by the prosecution with clear
intention and with unambiguous description of the offence
so as to enable the accused to defend himself. Guidance in
this regard may be derived from S.A.K Rehmani’s case
(2005 SCMR 364). Section 232 of the Cr.P.C. empowers
the appellate Court that in case it is found that on account
of omissions of particulars in framing charge, the accused
has been prejudiced and has not been provided an

opportunity of clear understanding of the charge to defend

13

himself, it may direct a fresh trial or even quash the
conviction. Section 232 Cr.P.C. speaks as under:-

“S.232. Effect of material error:- (1) If any
Appellate Court, or the High Court or [Court of
Session] in the exercise of power of revision or
its power under Chapter XVII, is of opinion
that any person convicted of an offence was
misled in his defence by the absence of a
charge by any error in the charge, it shall direct
a new trial to be held upon a charge framed in
whatever manner it thinks fit.

(2) Ifthe Court is of opinion that the facts of
the case are such that no valid charge could be
preferred against the accused in respect of the
facts proved, it shall quash the conviction”.

As per obligatory provisions contained in S.233 Cr.P.C. for
every distinct offence, a separate charge shall be framed in
order to enable the accused to defend the accusation
leveled against him. Section 233 Cr.P.C. runs as under:-
“S.233. Separate charges for distinct offences:
For every distinct offence of which any person
is accused there shall be a separate charge and
every such charge shall be tried separately,
except in the cases mentioned in sections 234,
235, 236 and 239 Cr.P.C.
S.235 Cr.P.C. provides a proper mechanism for trial of an
accused, charged for more than one offence, according to
which if, in one series of acts so connected together as to
form the same transaction, more offences than one are
committed by the same person, he may be charged with,
and tried at one trial for, every such offence. Sub-section

(2) of S.235 Cr.P.C. further clarifies the situation,

according to which if the alleged acts constitute an offence

*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

14

falling within two or more separate definitions of any law
in force for the time being by which offences are defined
or punished, the person accused of them may be charged
with, and tried at one trial, for each of such offence.
Sub-section 3 of §.235 Cr.P.C. says that if several acts, of
which one or more than one would by itself or themselves
constitute an offence, constitute when combined a different
offence, the person accused of them may be charged with
and tried at one trial for, the offence constituted by such
acts when combined and for any offence constituted by any
one, or more, of such acts. The following illustrations shall
further clear the above provision of $.235 Cr.P.C.
A commits house-breaking by day with intent to
commit adultery, and commits in the house so
entered adultery with B’s wife. A may be
separately charged with, and convicted of,
offences under section 454 and 497 PPC.
A entices B, the wife of C, away from C, with
intent to commit adultery with B, and then
commits adultery with her. A may be separately
charged with, and convicted of, offences under
sections 498 and 497 PPC.
12. According to S.2 (t) “Scheduled Offence”
means an offence as set out in the Third Schedule.
Abduction or kidnapping for ransom has been inserted in
the Third Schedule of Anti Terrorism Act, therefore,
S.365-A PPC is a schedule offence which is similar to

offence under Anti Terrorism Act punishment of which has

been provided under section S.7 (e) Anti Terrorism Act.

*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

15

Both the offences are identical except that the quantum of
punishment of both the offences slightly varies from each
other. The punishment provided under section 7 (e) ATA
for the offence of kidnapping for ransom or hostage taking
is death or imprisonment for life. Abduction or kidnapping
for ransom has been added in the Third Schedule to Anti
Terrorism Act, but its punishment has not been provided
therein, rather its punishment has been provided under
Pakistan Penal Code under section 365-A PPC i.e. death or
imprisonment for life and forfeiture of property. The
forfeiture of property in addition to death or imprisonment
for life under section 365-A PPC, is the point of variation
in the sentences of two offences, therefore, the accused is
to be charge sheeted under section 7 (e) of ATA and under
section 365-A PPC, separately. In case of proof of the
charge of abduction for ransom, if the offences had nexus
with the object of S.6, Anti Terrorism Act, the accused
would be convicted under section 7 (e) of the Anti
Terrorism Act, otherwise under section 365-A PPC.
However, at the same time, accused would not be
convicted under both the offences. The Anti Terrorism
Courts have been established in view of the provisions
contained in S.13 of Anti Terrorism Act, 1997. All

offences with regard to use or threats of actions, as

16

enunciated under section 6 of the Act and all offences
mentioned under third schedule, shall be exclusively triable
by the Anti Terrorism Court alongwith other offences with
which the accused may, under the Code be charged at the
same trial, as provided under 8.17 of the Act, 1997. The
Anti-Terrorism Court can also try other offences with
which an accused may under the Cr.P.C. be charged at the
same trial if the offence is connected with such other
offence. For instance, if an accused is charged under
section 7 (a) Anti-Terrorism Act and under §.302 PPC, he
shall be separately charge sheeted under section 7 (a) of the
Act, 1997 and under section 302 PPC and on proof of the
charges can be convicted and sentenced under each of the
two sections of law, as the one relates to Special Law while
the other relates to ordinary law. But in case of an offence
of the Anti Terrorism Act and scheduled offence, the
accused though would be charge sheeted separately, but
would be convicted under only one offence keeping in
view the proof available on the record.

13. We have observed that the learned Anti
Terrorism Courts have framed charges of the offences
under the Anti Terrorism Act, 1997, Offence of the Third
Schedule as well as connected offences of the Pakistan

Penal Code under single head by simply mentioning at the

17

end of the charge “and you thereby committed an
offence punishable under section 365-A PPC read with
S.7 (e) Anti Terrorism Act, 1997” or S.365-A/149 PPC
read with S.7 (e)/21-I, Anti Terrorism Act, which is a
wrong exercise of law on the subject. In such like cases,
separate charge-sheet would be formulated under each
offence of each statute as well as Offence of the Third
Schedule of Anti Terrorism Act. Similar, should be the
case, in other offences relating to Anti-Terrorism Act, 1997
and general law with which an accused is charged and is
being tried alongwith the special law or schedule offences
in one trial. However, in case of an offence under section
7 (e) ATA and 365-A, PPC, punishment will be inflicted
only under one section of law.

14. Various provisions provided under the Act of
1997, confer exclusive jurisdiction upon the Anti
Terrorism Court to take cognizance and try not only
scheduled offence, but also those connected with or arising
out of the schedule offence. All the offences under section
6 of the Anti Terrorism Act, 1997 and offence under the
third schedule attached to Anti Terrorism Act, 1997, would
be exclusively triable by the Anti Terrorism Court or
offences connected with the schedule offence. The Anti

Terrorism Court can inflict punishment upon the accused,

18

if found guilty under any provision contained in S.6 of the
Anti Terrorism Court with the corresponding punishment
provided under S.7 of the Act or provided under schedule
offence, but cannot award sentence under both the offences
i.e. under section 7 of the Act as well as the schedule
offence. However, in case of an offence under the Anti
Terrorism Act and general law, the Court can inflict
separate punishments under each offence of the two
enactments.
15. The answer to a point as to whether the
offence mentioned in the Third Schedule of Anti Terrorism
Act, would be triable by the Anti Terrorism Court only
when it has nexus with the object of terrorism otherwise
the same would be tried by an ordinary Court, can be found
in section 13 of the Anti Terrorism Act, 1997, which says:-
“S.13 [Establishment of Anti-Terrorism Court
(1) For the purpose of providing for the speedy
trial of the cases {under this Act]}, of schedule
offences, the Federal Government, or if so
directed by the Government, the Provincial
Government may establish by notification one or
more Anti-Terrorism Court in relation to {each
territorial area as specified by the High Court
concerned}.
The words {under this Act} used in S.13 clarify trial of
the cases under the Anti Terrorism Act and the words

“of scheduled offences” speak about the trial of the

scheduled offence as according to S.2 (t) “Scheduled

19

Offence” means an offence as set out in the Third
Schedule. So it is abundantly clear that the offences
mentioned in the Third Schedule to Anti Terrorism Act,
1997, even having no nexus with the object or terrorism
would be exclusively triable by the Anti Terrorism Act,
1997 and not by an ordinary Court.

16. In these case, it is not certain as to under
which offence, the appellants have been charge sheeted and
then convicted and sentenced. Section 367 Cr.P.C. deals
with the language of judgment and its contents. According
to sub-section (2) of Section 367 Cr.P.C. the judgment
shall specify the offence (if any) of which and the section
of the Pakistan Penal Code or other law under which the
accused is convicted and the punishment for which he is
sentenced.

17. As stated above, S.365-A PPC, by itself is a
scheduled offence having similarity with section 7 (e) Anti
Terrorism Act 1997, except that both slightly vary in terms
of quantum of sentence. Both the offences are exclusively
triable by the Anti Terrorism Court. The Anti Terrorism
Court can try other offence with which an accused may
under the PPC be charged at the same trial if the offence is
connected with the offences of Terrorism or the schedule

offence attached to ATA, but in such a situation charge

20

under each offence shall be distinct and separate and
similar would be the position of punishment under each
offence separately and unambiguously. The Anti Terrorism
Court can inflict punishment upon the accused, if found
guilty under any provision contained in section 6 of the
Anti Terrorism Court with the corresponding punishment
provided under S.7 of the act or punishment provided
under the schedule offence, but cannot inflict sentence
upon an accused for an offence under S.7 ATA as well as
under schedule offence, identical to the offence under
section 7 ATA. In such circumstances, punishment under
one offence shall be inflicted.

18. In view of the above discussed, we have
reached to an irresistible conclusion that that appellants
have been prejudiced by not confronting them with specific
charge and have been deprived of their right of defence.
Similarly, their convictions and sentences recorded by the
learned Trial Courts, in the circumstances, cannot be held
to be in accordance with law, therefore, we by allowing
these appeals, set aside the conviction and sentences of the
appellants, recorded and awarded by the learned Trial
Courts vide impugned judgments and remand the cases to
the learned Trial Courts concerned for trial de novo, right

from the stage of framing fresh formal charge against the

21

appellants. On setting aside the impugned judgments,
Cr.A. No.304-P/2014, titled, “State Vs Said Jamal etc”
having become infructuous, stands dismissed as such.
During this period the appellants shall remain as under trial
prisoners. The learned Trial Court shall conclude the trial
expeditiously. Office is directed to send the record to the
learned Trial Court within two days, without fail.
19. Before parting with the judgment, we deem it
appropriate to refer to the judgment rendered by one of us
Justice Assadullah Khan Chammkani, almost on identical
points in Cr.A. No.40-P/2015 titled, “ Khurram Qazafi
Mansoor Vs the State”, decided on 16.09.2015, wherein
the following directions had been issued to the Judges of
the Anti Terrorism Courts of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa:-

“The Additional Registrar (Judicial) of

this Court is directed to send copy of this

judgment forthwith, with intimation to

this Court, to the Judges of the Anti-

Terrorism Courts Khyber Pakhtunkhwa,

for their future guidance and_ strict

compliance in cases pending trial before

their Courts and in the freshly submitted

cases, so as to decrease the agonies of the

accused involved in such like cases

22

because if the exercise of formulation of
ambiguous charge sheets, remain in field,
it will open a Pandora’s box through
remand of cases to the Anti Terrorism
Courts in the Province, and the accused
already in custody in such like cases, will

suffer for no fault on their part”.

Announced
26.11.2015

JUDGE

JUDGE
