JUDGMENT SHEET

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,

BANNU BENCH
(Judicial Department)

W.P.No.634-B/2016

Bhutto Khan and 04 others

Versus

Inspector General of Police K.P.K and 04 others

JUDGMENT

Date of hearing: 27.02.2018.

Appellant-petitioner: By Shahid Khan Bangash,

Respondent:

Advocate.

By Shahid Hameed Qureshi, Addl: AG,

Respondent No. 4 A.C Custom By Muhammad Anwar

Khan Mamash Khel, Advocate, Mubarak Islam, AETO,

Niamat Ullah Inspector, Javed ur Rehman, Inspector &

Faroog Khan, Inspector.

SHAKEEL AHMAD, J.- Through this single judgment,

we propose to decide the following petitions:-

1. W.P.No.634-B/2016.

Imran/*

(Butto Khan and others Vs. Inspector General
of Police Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Peshawar and
others).

- CO.C.No.487-B/2016.

(Butto Khan and others Vs. Inspector General
of Police Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Peshawar and
others).

. WP.No.411-B/2015.

(Taufiq Ahmad Vs. Govt. of Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa and others).

(D.B) Mr. Justice Abdul Shakoor and Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad, JJ
-2-

4. W.P.No.470-B/2016
(Abeedullah Vs. Political Agent, North
Waziristan Agency and others).

5. CO.C.No.508-B/2016.
(Abeedullah Vs. Muhammad Anwar Khan
and another).

6. W.P.No.473-B/2016
(Allah Jan Vs. Govt. of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa
and others).

7. W.P.No.475-B/2016
(Mir Afzal Khan Vs. Govt. of Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa and others).

8. W.P.No.583-B/2016
(Malik Faridullah Khan Wazir Vs. Inspector
General of Police Khyber Pakhtunkhwa
Peshawar and others).

9. CO.C.No.381-B/2016.
(Malik Faridullah Khan Wazir Vs. Inspector
General of Police Khyber Pakhtunkhwa
Peshawar and others).

10.W.P.No.656-B/2016
(Noor Muhammad Vs. Inspector General of
Police Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Peshawar and
others).

11.C.0.C.No.51-B/2017.
(Noor Muhammad Vs. Muhammad Ali Asad
and another).

12.W.P.No.657-B/2016.
(Katoor Khan Vs. Inspector General of Police
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Peshawar and others).

13.C.0.C.No.349-B/2017.
(Katoor Khan Vs. Inspector General of Police
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Peshawar and others).

14.W.P.No.661-B/2016.
(Noorat Khan Vs. Inspector General of Police
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Peshawar and others).

15.C.0.C.No.354-B/2017.
(Noorat Khan Vs. Inspector General of Police
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Peshawar and others).

16.W.P.No.663-B/2016.

Imran/* (D.B) Mr. Justice Abdul Shakoor and Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad, JJ
-3-

(Syed Muhammad Vs. Inspector General of
Police Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Peshawar and
others).

17.C.0.C.No.355-B/2017.

(Syed Muhammad Vs. Inspector General of
Police Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Peshawar and
others).

18.W.P.No.672-B/2016.
(Said Nawaz Vs. Chief Minister Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa Peshawar and others).

19.W.P.No.726-B/2016.
(Gul Dar Khan Vs. The State and others).

2. In these petitions following questions of law are
involved, therefore, the same are being decided through this
consolidated judgment.

> Whether the vehicles in question
are Non Custom Paid and these
were brought to the settled area in
violation of the Customs Laws?

> Whether in presence of Customs
Act, 1969 as well as judgment of
the apex Court in Criminal
Petitions No.802 of 2015 and 22
of 2017, the Non Custom Paid
vehicles can be released on

Superdari?

3. The brief facts of the case are that the petitioners
are the permanent residents of North Waziristan Agency and
are now residing in Bannu as Temporary Dislocated Persons

(TDPs). That the Government of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Home

Imran/* (D.B) Mr. Justice Abdul Shakoor and Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad, JJ
-4-

& Tribal Affairs Department, vide circular No.SO(AR)/HD/1-
8/NCP/2014/KC_ dated 03" October, 2014, approved a
mechanism/policy for Non Custom Paid (NCP) vehicles of
TDPs of North Waziristan Agency in wake of Military
operation “Zarb-e-Azb” and circulated the same in different
Provincial Government Departments. That in pursuance of the
circular, referred to above, some vehicles were provisionally
registered and allowed to be plied in Districts Bannu,
D.I.Khan and Lakki Marwat, while other were not registered.
The Customs Officers/Officials intercepted some of the
vehicles while crossing the Kohat Tunnel, and it transpired
that no duty and taxes leviable on such imported vehicles
were paid, which culminated in registration of FIRs. Some of
the vehicles were apprehended by the local police and Excise
& Taxation Department of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and the
cases were accordingly registered.

4. Some of the petitioners filed petitions before the
learned Illaqa Magistrate for release of the vehicles in
question on Superdari, which were allowed. Not contended
with the same, the State filed criminal revisions before the
learned Additional Sessions Judge, and the learned revisional
Court through separate orders, recalled the orders passed by
the Illaqa Judicial Magistrate on the ground that the

petitioners have failed to prove their ownership in support of

Imran/* (D.B) Mr. Justice Abdul Shakoor and Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad, JJ
-5-

their contentions, therefore, they filed the quashment
petitions, while some of the petitioners invoked the
constitutional jurisdiction of this Court for release of the
vehicles in questions claiming to be its lawful owners and its
importation under the circular, referred to above.

5. In pursuance of the order of this Court the Custom
Department furnish their para-wise comments raising therein
many factual and legal objections.

6. It is, inter alia, agued by the learned counsel for the
petitioners that the petitioners are Temporary Dislocated
Persons (TDPs) and in order to facilitate the TDPS, the
Provincial Government of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Home &
Tribal Affairs Department vide circular No.SO (AR)/HD/1-
8/NCP/2014/KC. dated 03" October, 2014, approved the
mechanism/policy for Non Custom Paid (NCP) vehicles of
TDPs of North Waziristan Agency, therefore, interception and
apprehension of such vehicles by the Custom Officials, Police
and Excise & Taxation Department is illegal, without lawful
authority and without jurisdiction and they are entitled for its
custody.

7. As against that, the learned counsel representing
the Customs Department, A.A.G appearing on behalf of
Government of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and Excise & Taxation

Department assisted by their representatives strenuously

Imran/* (D.B) Mr. Justice Abdul Shakoor and Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad, JJ
-6-

opposed the contention of the learned counsel for the
petitioners and argued that under Section 19 of the Customs
Act, 1969, only the Federal Government is competent to grant
exemption from payment of custom duties chargeable thereon
and the circular issued by the Provincial Government offends
Section 19 of the ibid Act, therefore, seizure of the vehicles in
question and registration of FIRs by the Government
functionaries are legal; that neither the vehicles have lawfully
been imported into settled area nor the taxes and duties
leviable thereon been paid; that the learned Illaqa Judicial
Magistrate, Additional Sessions Judge and High Court have
got no power to release such vehicles on Superdari.

8. Arguments heard and record perused.

9. Perusal of the record reflects that the vehicles in
question are of foreign origin and were seized by the Customs
Officials, Police and Excise & Taxation Department being
Non Custom Paid. The petitioners have failed to produce any
documentary evidence showing their lawful import in the
settled areas.

10. The question emerging for consideration of this
Court, as formulated above, is whether the vehicles seized
have been lawfully imported and the persons importing them
have paid the duties and taxes leviable thereon and whether

the circular under which some vehicles were provisionally

Imran/* (D.B) Mr. Justice Abdul Shakoor and Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad, JJ
-7-

registered offends Section 19 of the Customs Act, 1969 or not,
the answer to the question is obviously in affirmative. It will
be advantageous to reproduce Section 19 of the Act ibid,
which reads as under:-

“19. General power to exempt from
customs duties..---[()] The [Federal
Government], subject to such
conditions, limitations or restrictions, if
any, as it thinks fit to impose, may, by
Notification in the official Gazette,
exempt any goods imported into, or
exported from, Pakistan or into or from
any specified port or station or area
therein, from the whole or any part of
the customs-duties chargeable thereon
[and may remit fine, penalty, charge or
any other amount recoverable under
this Act.]

[2] A Notification issued
under sub-section (1) shall be effective
from the day specified therein,
notwithstanding the fact that the issue
of the official Gazette in which such
Notification appears is published at any
time after that day.]

[3] Notwithstanding anything
contained in any other law for the time
being in force, including but not limited
to the Protection of Economic Reforms
Act, 1992 (XII of 1992), and

notwithstanding any decision or

Imran/* (D.B) Mr. Justice Abdul Shakoor and Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad, JJ
-8-

judgment of any forum, authority or

Court, no person shall, in the absence

of a_ notification by the Federal

Government published in the official

gazette expressly — granting and

affirming exemption from or refund of

customs duty on the basis of the

doctrine of promissory estoppel or on

account of any correspondence or

admission or promise or commitment

or concessionary order made or

understanding given whether in writing

or otherwise, by any government

department or authority.]
11. A bare reading of this section reveals that the
notification regarding exemption of any goods imported into
Pakistan can only be issued by the Federal Government. There
are certain other provisions of Customs Act which empower
the Central Board of Revenue also to issue certain
notifications in matters pertaining to the delegated legislation,
and the exemptions and the scope and extent thereof under
Section 19 of the Customs Act, 1969 are exclusively within
the competence of Federal Government.
12. We are also fortified by the judgment of the
Honourable Supreme Court of Pakistan in Criminal Petitions

No.802 of 2015 and 22 of 2016, where identical questions

were answered by the august Supreme Court of Pakistan and

Imran/* (D.B) Mr. Justice Abdul Shakoor and Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad, JJ
-9.

held that the seizure of vehicles not lawfully imported, and the
persons importing them have not paid the duties and taxes
leviable thereon, is legal.

13. For what has been discussed above, we find no
substance in the petitions in hand, therefore, the same are

hereby dismissed alongwith connected Contempt of Court

Petitions.

Announced.

Dt:27.02.2018.
JUDGE
JUDGE

Imran/* (D.B) Mr. Justice Abdul Shakoor and Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad, JJ
