B.A. Petition No.68-—™ _/2017

©

QAZA SWAT, MINGORA

Muhammad Bilal son of Muhamamd Shafiq R/o Dilbodi Ogai

Mansehra

wusseeee, -Accused/ petitioner

VERSUS

1. The State

2. Muhammad Rahman son of Aziz ur Rehman R/o Qambar

Mohallah Golden Tehsil 6: Districtr Swat.
cedeeneeeaeeeeenes (Respondents)

Case F.LR. No. 237 Dated 05/12/2016.
U/S-392/419/171-ppe _- “ Skha Kot”

Subject:- Application U/S-497-Cr.PC for the grant of post

arrest bail to the accused/petitioner tili the final
decision of the case. '

RESPECTFULLY SHEWETH

D)

4)

Ye

3)

That the accused / petitioner has been arrested by the local
police in the above cited case and is now behirid the bars
since his arrest. (Copy of FIR is hereby attached as Annex:
“A ”),

That the accused /petitioner moved an application before the
court of Additional Session Judge/ Zilla Qazi Mzlakand for
his post arrest bail, but the same was declined vide order
dated 01/08/2017.. (Copy of the application and order are
attached as Annex: B )
f

That feeling aggrieved from the impugned order of the
jJearned Jower court, the accused/ petitioner is humbly

NSN

wy

BEFORE THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT DAR UL (~ )

Te,

JUDGMENT SHEET

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH. COURT,
MINGORA BENCH (DAR-UL-QAZA), SWAT
(Judicial Department)

Cr.M B.A. No. 368-M/2017. )

JUDGMENT

Date of hearing: 08.09.2017.

Petitioner:- __(Muhammad Bilal) _by__ Mr.
Jehanzeb Khalil, Advocate.

- Respondents:- (the State & 1 another) by
Barrister Asad Hameed-ur-Rahman, State
. counsel and Mr. Hairat Khan, Advocate.

MOHAMMAD IBRAHIM KHAN, J. The learned
Additional Sessions Judge/Izafi Zila Qazi
Malakand at Dargai mere on involvement of the
accused/Petitioner Muhammad Bilal in the
statement recorded under section 161/164
Cr.P.C nominated by Mohammad Sohaib son of

the complainant and with regard to the evidence

leading to believe the Petitioner being habitual

offender in offences of similar nature is to be

) discouraged by refusing him bail. As due to
aoe .

a such dishonest acts of an accused, the moral

values of the society are at the verge of collapse

E a and the offence being fall under the prohibitory
ne xantine ‘

“war High Court Be:
-teiDar-ul-Qaza, Senn clause of section 497 CrP.C., hence the

Nawab ‘

application bearing No. 40/4 of the year 2017 ») iz

was dismissed.

2. Herein Muhammad Bilal being
implicated in case FIR No. 237 dated
05.12.2016 charged under sections 392,419,171
PPC registered at Police. Station Sakhakot, is

optimistic for the grant of his post arrest bail.

3. On return from Saudi Arabia by his
flight reaching herein at Peshawar International
Airport at 1500 hours. Muhammad Rahman
accompanied by his son Mohammad Sohaib .
hired a Taxi driven by Muhammad Zada. They
took start on 15.30 hours from Peshawar
International Airport for their village. The
complainant wes sleeping on the ‘front seat
inclined back as tired. The driver stopped the
motorcar, so he was awaken. All of them
witnessed the motorcar bearing No. §801
having registration number of Punjab. Those
who were sitting in the said motorcar gave them
signal to halt, the driver came out of his

motorcar and was demanded registration

Nawab
3
documents. The. driver then given them
registration documents of the motorcar
alongwith its: key. The complainant, his son and
friend of son of the complainant by the name of
Mohammad Fayaz were also alighted and went
nearby. The persons sitting in: the motorcar
having nuraber from Punjat: had worn
Excise Department vniform and introduced
themselves as Excise Department Officials. Out
, of these persons, the body search of the
complainant was conducted and the higgage
belong to Muhammad F'ayaz were also checked.
Those persons also stated that the registration
: }
documents of the motorcar are fake and asked
for its documents. The driver told them that he
is not in possession of the fake documents. The
person who was sitting on the front seat of the
said ‘motorcar bearing umber from Punjab
e Province asked the complainant about the
eo , currency in the pocket, who was told about
possessing ‘Saudi Riyals. The envelope
arrest containing one lac Saudi Riyals was handed to

i

ninet . oo! 4
BRAT cca Benen him, who started his motorcar and went towards
pegantay Tr gaaza. SE ' ' Do

tanger

Nawab
Boghawar High Coyet Bench
Mingora‘Oar-ul-Qaza, Swat.

Nawab

Malakand side. Out of the accused, one sitting
on the front seat was having pistol, while the
remaining persons sitting on the rear seat were
having Kalashnikovs and the driver was empty-
handed. If, all the accused are brought before
him, he can easily identify them, | thus making

the report in the like manner.

4. Having heard arguments of learned

counsel for the Petitioner, learned counsel for

- the complainant and learned State counsel for

the State, record with their assistance gone

through.

5. As far as -implication of the
accused/Petitioner in cases bearing FIR No. 512
dated 14.05.2012, FIR No. 1149 dated
05.10.2012, FIR No. 1212 dated 26.11.2013,
FIR No. 179 dated 07.06.2015 and FIR No.
1135 dated 09.10.2016 are concerned, he has
already been released on bail in all the above-
referred cases. At present, learned counsel for
the Petitioner states that the Petitioner is not

involved in any other case except the present

Nawab

one seeking bail. Attested copies of the
judgments in the above cases being furnished,
which are placed on record. This occurrence has
happened on 05.12.2016 later after almost 7
months Muhammad Sohaib, the son of the
complainant recorded his statement, who on his
own satisfaction has implicated the accused-
Petitioner to be an accused who was wearing
Excise Department official's uniform and has
committed «he offence as stated above in the
First information Report, The requirement for
the identification of the accused-Petitioner to

t

have conducted identification parade, record
| .

does not find mention any such identification
parade. Out of the one lac Saudi Riyals, the
Investigating Officer badly filed to recover
even some of the Saudi Riyals and above all the
motorcar bearing No. 2801 Punjab has not been

recovered. The Petitioner is stated to be a student

t

of University, who might have previous history of

t

his involvement, but having no evidence for his

conviction he has been erstwhile enlarged on bail.
There seeins to be implication of the
Peshawar High Can

MingoraiDar-ulQar

Ch aie ad

6

accused/Petitioner on account of his previous

involvement and he has been named by the son

of the complainant seems to be at the behest of

the police.

6.

It has been held in 2005 YLR 1693

(Lahore) " Muhammad Shafi _ vs the State".

The relevant citation is reproduced as under:-

Nawab

“Involvement of accused in number of
criminal cases was not sujficient to
deprive him of his right of liberty in
the absence of his conviction therein
by a competent Court, Recovery of
stoler: property, prima’ __facie,
amounted to a civil transaction
between the parties which was to be
Proved through evidence yet to be
produced before the Tria’ Court.

Accused was no more required for

investigation. Trial of accused was not

in prozress. Case of accused required
further inquiry as contemplated by S.
497 (2), CrP.C. Offence allegedly
committed by accused did aot Sfall
within the ambit of prohibitory clause
of S. 497 (1) Cr.P.C. Accused was

admitted to bail in circumstances.

In support of non-recovery referred

to 2006 YER’ 3088 (Karachi) "Manu _ alias

36

BAL MR

7

Manthar and 3 others vs the State", wherein it

has been held’as:- . 4

a
"Nothing had been recovered from
the possession of three out iof four
accused persons which showed that
only vague allegations were made
against said accused persons for
participation, in the commission of
crime. Alleged looted cash and bundle
of cigarettes were not recovered from
possession of said three accused
persons. Saied accused were released

on bail in circumstances."

Whereas with regard to non-

identification test 2005 _P Cr.LJ 531 (Lahore)

"Muhammad Kazim vs the State" has been

referred. The relevant citation speaks of:-

"Accused was not named in FIR and

he had not been put to any .

identification test. Question of

involvement of accused in the case

needing serious consideration, case

was covered under subsection (2) of

S.497 Cr.P.C calling for further

ie inquiry into the guilt of accused. Disk
|

in question was recovered from the

o accused after more than one and half
months of alleged occurrence. Case
ATTESTAD against accused attracted offence
under S. 411 PPC which was not

Exantiner {
Peshawar High Caturt Bench covered under prohibitory clause of S.

Mingora/Dar-ul-Qaza, Swat.
\

Nawab
i as
| vd
497 (1), Cr.P.C. Accused was stated to (7

be previous non-convict. Accused was

granted bail, in circumstances. :
Whereas there is delay in lodging of
the FIR or statement under section 161 Cr.P.C,
such delayed statement could not substitute an

FIR. Ref 2010 YLR 1377 (Peshawar) "

Ibrahim Khan and another vs the State and

another".

7. In view of the scenario, the
Petitioner is entitled to the concession of bail.
Hence, he is asked to furnish bail bonds in the
sum of Rs. 200,000/- (Rupees two lacs) with
two sureties each in the like amount to the
satisfaction of learned Trial Court, who shall
ensure that the sureties are local, reliable and

men of means.

These are the reasons of my short

oe

Announced ‘6
Dt: 08.09.2017. ‘JUDGE

order of even date.

Certified to be true cany ,

