JUDGMENT SHEET
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
BANNU BENCH.
(Judicial Department)

Cr. Misc:BA # 286-B of 2017
Muhammad Jamil Vs: State etc:

JUDGMENT

Date of hearing 06/9/2017

Appellant-Petitioner: By Mr. Farooq Khan Sokari,

Advocate.

Respondent: By Mr. Sultan Mehmood Khan,

Advocate.
State By Mr. Qudrat Ullah Khan
AAG

SHAKEEL AHMAD, J.--- Through instant Criminal

Miscellaneous bail petition, the petitioner / accused
Muhammad Jamil s/o Muhammad Shereen r/o Kot Pusha
Ghoriwala Bannu seeks post-arrest bail in case F.ILR #
386 dated 09/9/2013, registered U/Ss- 302/324/148/149

PPC at Police Station , Ghoriwala District, Bannu.
2. The allegations against the petitioner /

accused are that he along-with others during a “Jirga”

proceedings opened indiscriminate firing on the

complainant party due to which his opponents namely-

Bakht Ali, Dost Ali, Ismail, Yousaf Khan and Wali

Zaman were hit and lost their lives. Earlier, the co-

accused of the instant case namely-Wahab, and the

accused Zahidullah charged in the counter case vide FIR

Mo. 387 dated 09.9.2013 registered U/Ss- 302/324/34

PPC at PS Ghoriwala District Bannu were allowed bail by

this court vide order dated 14.10.2013 on the ground that

both the parties are involved in cross-cases, and it is yet to

be determined as to who is the aggressor and who has

been aggressed upon, which fact brings both the cases for

further inquiry keeping in view the cross version of the

incident put forth by each of the parties.

3. The learned counsel for the petitioner /

accused argued that not only the co-accused namely-
Wahab having identical role has been allowed bail, but the

accused Zahidullah charged by the accused party in

counter case was also released on bail by this court. He

next argued that on principle of consistency the accused /

petitioner deserves the concession of bail. He lastly

argued that mere abscondence and commencement of trial

would not dis-entitle the petitioner from the concession of

bail.

4. As against that the learned counsel

representing the complainant argued that after

commission of offence the accused remained fugitive

from law and was arrested on 25.6.2017. He was declared

as proclaimed offender; he further argued that the trial has

commenced and statements of the PWs are being

recorded, therefore, petitioner is not entitled to be released

on bail.

5. The learned AAG representing the State

admitted that a cross version vide FIR No. 387 dated
09.9.2013 registered U/Ss-302/324/34 PPC at PS

Ghoriwala District Bannu has been recorded against the

complainant party and the role of the petitioner is not

distinguishable from that of the co-accused namely-

Wahab who has been released on bail by this court vide

order dated 14.10.2013.

6. Arguments heard and record perused.

7. Perusal of the record reveals that the co-

accused namely-Wahab having identical role has been

released on bail by this court vide order dated 10.2.2013

and not only this the accused Zahidullah charged in the

cross case was also allowed bail in Cr: Misc: BA No.188-

B of 2013. The Hon’ble Court while releasing the accused

on bail held that in both the cases the time of occurrence,

venue of crime and parties are the same, and that it is yet

to be determined as to who is the aggressor and who has

been aggressed upon, which brings both the cases for

further inquiry in view of the cross version of the incident
put forth by each of the parties. By now it is a settled law

that in such cases bail is granted on the ground of further

inquiry, as it gives rise to a question as to which party is

aggressor and who has been aggressed upon. In this

respect reliance is placed on case titled Shoaib Mehmood

Butt V. [ftikhar-ul-Haq and 3 others (1996 SCMR 1845)

wherein it was held as under:-

"In case of counter-versions arising from the
same incident, one given by complainant in F.L.R.
and the other given by the opposite-party it is
almost settled that such cases are covered for grant
of bail on the ground of further enquiry as
contemplated under section 497(2), Cr.P.C. In
such cases normally, ball is granted on the ground
of further enquiry for the reason that the question
as to which version is correct is to be decided by
the trial Court which is supposed to record
evidence and also appraise the same in order to
come to a final conclusion in this regard. In cases
of counter-versions, normally, plea of private
defence is taken giving rise to question as to which
party is aggressor and which party is aggressed

against."
8. The role attributed to the petitioner is at par

with the co-accused Wahab who has already been released

on bail by this Court; therefore, the petitioner is also

entitled for equal treatment having one and the same role

in the same case. The learned counsel for the complainant

is unable to distinguish the role of the present petitioner

from the role of the co-accused Wahab, who has already

been granted post-arrest bail by this court. Reliance is

placed on the case titled Gul Muhammad and others Vs

The State and others 2010 P.Cr.L.J 340, Nasib Khan Vs.

The State and another 2017 P.Cr.L.J Note-17.

9. Mere abscondence or commencement of

trial is no ground to refuse bail to the accused. In this

respect reference can well be made on a case titled Safdar

Hussain Vs State etc: reported in 2017 PLJ 115, wherein

it was held as under:-

"So far as abscondence of petitioner for

almost four years is concerned, suffice it
to observe, mere  abscondence or

commencement of trial is no ground for

refusal of bail, if the petitioner is entitled

to the same on the ground of further

enquiry."
10. For what has been discussed above, this bail
petition is allowed and consequently, the petitioner
Muhammad Jamil is admitted to bail in the above
mentioned criminal case subject to his furnishing bail
bonds in the sum of Rs.2,00,000/- (two Lacs) with two
sureties each in the like amount to the satisfaction of trial
court.

Announced. JUDGE
06/9/2017

*Imran Steno*
