JUDGMENT SHEET
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,

BANNU BENCH
(Judicial Department)

Cr.MBA.No.489-B/2016
Saddique Zaman
Versus
The State and others
JUDGMENT
Date of hearing: 19.01.2017

Petitioner: (Saddique Zaman) by Syed
Fakhruddin Shah Advocate.

Respondents: (State) by Mr. Qudratullah Khan
Gandapur, Asstt: A.G. and others
by Imran Ali Shah Advocate.

KKK

ISHTIAQ IBRAHIM, J.- Petitioner Saddique

Zaman seeks his release on bail in case FIR No.945

dated 17.12.2016 registered under Section 324/34

PPC at Police Station Ghoriwala, District Bannu.

Relief of bail was refused to the accused/petitioner

by learned Additional Sessions Judge-II, Bannu

vide his order dated 23.12.2016, hence, this

petition for the same relief.
2. Briefly stated facts of the case are that on

17.12.2016 at 1445 hours, complainant Ameer

Muhammad Khan while in injured condition

alongwith his injured brother Taj Ali Khan reported

to the local police at Emergency Room of Civil

Hospital, Bannu to the effect that he alongwith his

brother Taj Ali Khan were riding on motorcycle

and when reached at the spot at about 1400 hours,

accused Nisar Zaman and Saddique Zaman came

on their motorcycle and stopped it near them. They

took out their pistols and started firing at them due

to which the complainant and his brother Taj Ali

Khan got hit and sustained injuries. Motive for the

occurrence is stated to be blood feud between the

parties.

3. Learned counsel for the petitioner

contended that the accused/petitioner is innocent

and has been falsely implicated in the present case;

that the site plan and medical reports do not support

the prosecution story and that the accused/petitioner

Imran P.S/*
being a police constable was present in Police Line-

2, Bannu at the time of occurrence, he referred to

the statements of Umar Dad Khan S.I, and Sajid

Kamal MHC No.6514 in this respect; that though

allegedly the three empties were recovered from the

spot but were not sent to the F.S.L to ascertain as to

whether the same were fired from one or different

weapons and that all these factors make the case of

the accused/petitioner one of further inquiry

entitling him to the concession of bail.

4. Conversely, learned Asstt. A.G for the

State assisted by learned counsel for the

complainant vehemently resisted the bail

application and argued that the accused/petitioner is

directly charged in the promptly lodged FIR; that

the occurrence has been witnessed by the

complainant; that site plan and the medical reports

support the version of the complainant and that the

plea of alibi of the accused/petitioner is yet to be

Imran P.S/*
proved at the trial and at this stage, he is not entitled

to the concession of bail.

5. I have heard learned counsel for the

parties as well as learned Asstt: A.G. for the State

and scanned the record with their valuable

assistance.

6. The occurrence had taken place on

17.12.2016 at about 1400 hours, whereas the report

was lodged at 1445 hours. The primary plea of the

accused/ petitioner is that he is serving in police

department as constable and on 17.12.2016 at

relevant time he was present in Police Line-2

Bannu. This is not a hard and fast rule that plea of

alibi would not be taken into consideration at the

stage of bail, however, circumstances of each and

every case are to be looked into. The tests which

are required for the genuineness of plea of alibi

should be that it has been taken at the earliest, that

it appears to be reasonable and there is no question

of manipulation for the same. In the present case

Imran P.S/*
the accused/ petitioner was arrested on the very day

of the occurrence from Police Line-2, Bannu. His

stance was also that he was present in Police Line-

2, Bannu and has not participated in the

commission of offence. He submitted an

application to the police hierarchy, whereby

statements of two responsible persons were

recorded under Section 164 Cr.PC, one is Umar

Dad Khan, S.I, Line Officer, Line-2 FRP, Bannu

and the other is Sajid Kamal, MHC No.6514, Line-

2 FRP, Bannu. They have confirmed the stance of

the petitioner that at the relevant time he was

present in Line-2 FRP, Bannu. The question before

this Court is whether in such like circumstances

where two police officers/officials confirm the

presence of the petitioner at the relevant time, the

same can be discarded for the purpose of bail just

by holding that the plea of alibi is to be determined

by the trial Court is not correct. Besides that the

plea of alibi of the petitioner has not been rebutted

Imran P.S/*
by the prosecution rather the same has been

confirmed by the Investigating Agency by

recording the statements of two witnesses who are

categoric on the point that at the relevant time the

petitioner was present in Line-2 FRP, Bannu. This

factor alone makes’ the case of the

accused/petitioner arguable for the purpose of bail

being one of further inquiry.

7. In case titled ‘Zaigham Shari,

State and others (2016 SCMR 18), it is held that:-

“There is no hard and fast rule
that plea of alibi shall not be
considered at bail stage because
while granting or refusing to grant
bail to an accused person, the
Court is not required to see and
consider the materials/evidence,
collected in favour of the
Prosecution but also to give
proper attention to the defence
plea, taken by an_ accused

person”.

8. In the case of “Khalid Javed Gillani Vs.

The State” (PLD 1978 SC 256), broader principles

Imran P.S/*
were laid down with regard to accepting the plea of

alibi of accused in that case, making tentative

assessment of the materials brought on record and it

was held as follows:-

"S. 497---Bail---Assessment of
evidence---Court, in matters of
bail, to go by its assessment of the
common course of natural events,
human conduct, and public and
private business, in their relation
to the facts of the particular case--
-Prosecution though may prove a
prosecution witness to be man of
unimpeachable character _for
purpose of bail, however, hostile
relationship between parties a
circumstance not irrelevant to
Court's assessment of material
produced before it---Petitioner's
plea of alibi supported by affidavit
of a_ disinterested person, a
medical practitioner of high
repute, not having any ostensible
connection with petitioner---Bail
absence of proof of Doctor's
evidence being not fit to be relied
upon, held, could not be properly
refused---Impugned order being
based on misreading of S.497,

Imran P.S/*
petitioner ordered to be released

on bail."

9. Thus taking a tentative assessment of the

available material, the case of the accused/

petitioner requires further probe into his guilt.

Resultantly, this petition is accepted and the

accused/petitioner is admitted to bail on furnishing

bail bonds in the sum of Rs.1,00,000/- (Rupees one

lac) with two sureties each in the like amount to the

satisfaction of Illaqa/Duty Judicial Magistrate.

10. Any observations made in the order

being tentative in nature should in no way prejudice

the proceedings before the learned trial Court.

11. Above are detailed reasons of my short

order of the even date.

Announced.
Dt: 19.01.2017. JUDGE

Imran P.S/*
