JUDGMENT SHEET

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
PESHAWAR
(Judicial Department)
Cr.A. No.583-P/2012

Date of hearing: 25.02.2015

Appellant (s): Saif ur Rehman alias Safoor etc by Mr.
Ishtiagq Ibrahim, Advocate.

Respondent (s) : Shahid Ullah complainant by Mr. Hussain Ali,
Advocate and the State Mr. Rab Nawaz Khan, AAG.

JUDGMENT

ASSADULLAH KHAN CHAMMKANTL, J.- This common

judgment shall dispose of the instant criminal appeal as well as

connected Cr.A. No.592, as both are arising out of one and the

same judgment dated 28.11.2012, passed by learned Judge

Anti-Terrorism Court-I, Peshawar, whereby appellants (1) Saif

ur Rehman alias Safoor (2) Gul Raza (3) Sajid Ullah and (4)

Hameed Gul alias Naveed, have been convicted and sentenced

under section 365-A PPC read with S.7 (e) of Anti Terrorism

Act, 1997, to undergo life imprisonment each. Benefit of S.382-

B Cr.P.C. has been extended to them.

2. The prosecution case is that 29.12.2011, one

Shahid Ullah went missing, regarding which, his son Abdul

Haseeb, lodged a report in Police Station Daud Zai on

01.01.2012, to the effect that on 29.12.2010 at 0330 hours, his

father left house for city, but did not return home till date; that

today at 0740 hours, he received call on his cell phone

No.0344-9825463, from cell phone number of his father i.e.

0315-5250507, vide which demand of rupees sixty lacs as

extortion money/ransom for release of his father, was made by

a stranger who also threatened him of dire consequences in

case of non-payment of ransom; that having no enmity he did

not charge anyone. Report of the complainant was reduced in

Daily Diary No.33 dated 01.01.2011. According to author of the

report, the alleged abductee being a doubtful character,

involved himself in abduction case vide FIR No.239 dated

27.04.2009 under sections 365-A/368/148/149 PPC, PS Daud

Zai, the matter seems to be self initiated, therefore, inquiry

was sought.

3. Later on, on recovery of the abdcutee, on the basis

of direction of the learned Justice of Peace on the application

of the alleged abductee under section 22-A Cr.P.C., FIR No.72

dated 03.03.2012, was registered under section 365-A PPC

read with S.7 ATA, 1997, at Police Station Daud Zai, Peshawar,

wherein it has been alleged by Shahid Ullah abductee that on

28.12.2011, he was contacted by his friend Shaukat on his

mobile phone to visit his house, situated near General Bus

Stand Kohat so as to offer “Fatiha” on the cemetery of his

deceased son buried in Halala grayard Banda Daud Shah

Karak, on which he on 29.12.2010, left his house at 1530 hours

to see his above named friend, but he contacted him again

that he was waiting for him in Hashtnagri, so he reached there;

that in Hashtnagri, they both boarded a Flying Coach bound for

Teri Banda Daud Shah Karak and at 2030 hours, reached

Banda Daud Shah. After deboarding from the Flying Coach and

covering a little distance on foot, seven armed persons namely,

Saif ur Rehman alias Saifoor, Raza Khan, Khattak, Qismat Ali,

Naveed and Iftikhar, present there caught hold of him and took

him to the nearby hills, where he was kept in captivity for six

days; that on 01.01.2011, the accused contacted from his cell

phone inmates of his house demanding rupees sixty lacs as

ransom for his release and threatened them of dire

consequence, in case of failure; that he was then shifted to the

house of accused Saif ur Rehman and kept there for fifty four

days. On 26.02.2011, his brother Noor Ahmad and brother-in-

law Zahoor Ahmad paid rupees five lacs as ransom in his

presence to the accused, as a consequence whereof, he was

set free. Statement of the abductee was also recorded under

section 164 Cr.P.C. before the learned Judicial Magistrate.

4. After arrest of the accused and completion of

investigation, challan was submitted against them before the

learned Trial Court, where they were formally charge sheeted

to which they pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. To prove its

case, prosecution examined as many as nine witnesses. After

closure of the prosecution evidence, statements of the accused

were recorded under section 342 Cr.P.C., wherein they denied

the prosecution allegations and professed their innocence.

They, however, declined to be examined on oath or to produce

evidence in defence. On conclusion of trial, learned Trial Court,

after hearing both the sides, convicted and sentenced the

appellants-accused, as mentioned above, hence, this appeal.

5. Learned counsel for the appellant argued that

impugned judgment of the learned Trial Court is against the

law, facts and evidence on record; that no tangible evidence

whatsoever has been brought on record to prove the alleged

abduction for ransom; that as evident from the very first report

of complainant Abdul Haseb incorporated in daily diary, the

alleged abductee having doubtful character being involved in

abduction cases himself, the matter was held to be self

initiated, therefore, inquiry was sought; that in his statement

the alleged abductee has charged by names all the accused

along with their parentages and addresses, which seems very

strange as none of them was known to him, which smells mala

fide on his part; that abductee has not been recovered from

the custody of the accused; that the entire episode of

abduction and payment of ransom is just an imaginary drama

for getting ill gotten gain; that statement of the alleged

abductee being suffering from material contradictions and

discrepancies creating serious doubts in the prosecution case,

has wrongly been believed and relied upon by the learned Trial

Court, therefore, the impugned judgment is liable to be

reversed.

6. Conversely, learned AAG assisted by learned

counsel for the complainant contended that prosecution has

successfully established the guilt of the accused through

cogent and confidence inspiring evidence, particularly, through

the testimony of Shahid ullah abductee as in such like cases,

solitary statement of abductee is sufficient for recording

conviction. They while supporting the impugned judgment

sought dismissal of the appeal.

7. We have heard the arguments and perused the

record carefully.

8. According to the very first report of Abdul Haseb

complainant, incorporated in D.D. No.33 dated 01.01.2001 , his

father Shahid ullah, left house for city on 29.12.2010, but did

not return home till 01.01.2011. It was on 01.01.2011, when

he lodged report about his missing, which seems very strange

being against the natural human conduct as a son or other

inmates of a person cannot be expected to keep mum for three

days about non-return of his father/elder of the family, who

left for local city, especially, taking into consideration the worst

law and order situation in the country, particularly, in this

province (Khyber Pakhtunkhwa), where everyone always

remain conscious about inmates of his/her house, who left

house for outside/city. We being member of the same society

are mindful of the fact that in the eventuality of even little

delay in return of an inmate of the house proceeded outside,

the other members of the house contact him/her about his

whereabouts and cause of his being late. The unnatural

conduct of the complainant to know about non-return of his

father till evening of the same day is even does not appeal to a

prudent mind what to say of three days. It also does not

appeal to a our mind that a father will left for Karak from

Peshawar with his friend and he will not inform inmates of his

house about the same. Complainant has not stated anything in

his report that during these three days he was searching for his

father, that’s why the author of his report in the concluding

part of report rightly mentioned the episode to be self initiated

as such inquiry was sought in the matter. Later on, abductee

Shahid Ullah appeared and recorded his statement before the

learned Judicial Magistrate on 10.03.2011 i.e. after more 2

months 9 days of the incident wherein he while narrating the

entire episode of his abduction till his release on alleged

payment of ransom charged accused Raza Khan, Sajid,

Khattak, Asmat Ali residents of Teri Banda Daud Shah, Naveed

and Iftikhar residents of Matta Daman and Shabqadar,

respectively. His statement in ditto recorded under section 164

Cr.P.C. is reproduced below for ready reference.

“On 28.12.2010 at morning time (about 10.00 a.m), I

was present at my house, when I was called by my

friend Shaukat son of Samar Gul, resident of Halala,
Banda Daud Shah Teri District Karak, from his mobile
phone No.03465585173, on my mobile phone
No.0315525057, and asked me to come on the next
day to his house situated near General Bus Stand,
Kohat for Fatiha on the grave of his son buried in the
graveyard of village Halala. On this I came out of my
house on 29.12.2010 at about 1530 hours and
boarded a Suzuki of passengers for Hashtnagri,
Peshawar, when in the mean while Shaukat again
called me on phone and told me that the was waiting
for me at Hashtnagri. When I reached Hashtnagri,
Shaukat was present there and I met him. We
boarded a flying coach for Teri Banda Daud Shah
District Karak. When we reached Teri, Banda Daud
Shah at about 2030 hours, we got down from the
Flying Coach and started on foot. After covering some
distance, seven persons emerged duly armed with fire
arms from the hills situated on the road side and their
names I knew later on, as 1. Saifur Rehman alias
Saifur son of unknown 2. Raza Khan 3. Sajid son of
Saifur 4. Khattak son of Shaukat Ali 5. Asmat Ali son
of Shaukat Ali, residents of Teri Banda Daud Shah 6.
Naveed son of Qadeer Gul, resident of Matta Daman,

Shabqadar and 7. Iftikhar son of unknown, resident of

Ring Road Patang Chauk Peshawar. They caught hold
of me and took me to the nearby hills and kept me
there in illegal confinement for 6 days. During this
period the aforesaid accused contacted my family
members on my mobile phone on 01.01.2011 and
directed me to tell my family members to pay the
amount of Rs.60,00,000/- (sixty lacs) to the aforesaid
accused as ransom for my release. The accused told
me that in case the aforesaid amount is not paid to
them, they will kill me and also threatened my family
members with dire consequences. The accused then
shifted me to the house of accused Saifur Rehman
mentioned above situated at village Kool and confined
me there in a room and kept me there in illegal
confinement for 54 days. During this period the
accused were making different kind of demands from
my family members. On 26.02.2011 my brother Noor
Ahmad and my brother in law Zahoor Ahmad son of
Mugeem Khan resident of Kula Dher, Charsadda paid
the amount of Rs.5,00,000/- (five lacs) as ransom for
my release in my presence to accused Shaukat and
Saifur Rehman alias Saifur mentioned above and
thereafter I was released and I came to my house.
Hence I charge all the accused mentioned above

for my abduction for the purpose of ransom”.

10

9. During trial the alleged abductee appeared as PW.9

wherein he introduced some new events that after 6 days he

was brought to the house of accused Saif ur Rehman from

Halala mountains, where he was kept for 54 days and then

again shifted to Halala mountains, where rupees five lacs were

paid by his brother Noor Ahmad and brother-in-law Zahoor

Ahmad to the accused/abductors and he was thus released.

He has not stated about his re-shifting to Halala mountain

from the house of Saif ur Rehman in his statement u/s 164

Cr.P.C., thus this stance of the alleged abductee amounts to

dishonest improvement, just to bring in line his statement with

Zahoor Ahmad (PW.7) who deposed about payment of the

ransom amount in Halala mountain. In his statement abductee

has charge all the accused by names along with their

parentages and addresses. In cross-examination he deposed

that prior to occurrence he did not know the names of other

accused except Shaukat and that during his captivity he learnt

the names of the accused as they used to perform duty of

guard on him. He however, admitted that during his captivity

the accused were not carrying names plates showing their

parentages and addresses. It does not appeal to a prudent

11

mind that abductors involved in such like offences would

commit any such foolishness to call each other by names.

Even we have observed that criminals of such like offences,

usually never come in front of the abductee, rather keep the

abductee in the captivity in seclusion. The criminals of such

like offences even call each other with fake names which they

only know, therefore, disclosing the correct names alongwith

parentages of the accused and their addresses by the

abductee in his statement under section 164 Cr.P.C. smells

mala fide on his part about involvement of the accused in the

commission of offence. Admittedly, the abductee has not been

recovered by the local police either from direct or indirect

custody of the accused nor on their pointation. The abductee

even did not appear before the police on the very first day of

his alleged release as admitted by him that after his release

he went home and as he was not feeling well so he after

two/three days went to Police Station and recorded his

statement under section 161 Cr.P.C. Thus, this belated

statement of the alleged abductee cannot be held free of

consultation, deliberation and concoction. The abductee has

neither pointed out to the police that place of Halala

12

mountains where he was allegedly confined nor the place of

payment of ransom, as no site plan has been prepared of

these places. Besides, no site plan of the house of accused

Saif ur Rehman has been prepared, where the alleged

abductee allegedly spent fifty four days in captivity.

10. Zahoor Ahmad who appeared as PW.7 and

deposed about payment of ransom amount is the real brother

of the alleged abductee, so he will definitely depose in favour

of his brother/abductee. He has also not pointed out the place

of the payment of alleged ransom amount to the police. In

cross-examination while contradicting the version of the

abductee he deposed that at the time of payment Haseeb

Ullah son of abductee was also present with them. Whereas

according to abductee the ransom was paid only by PW

Zahoor and Noor Ahmad. He has not shown presence of his

son Haseeb Ullah at the time of payment. PW Noor Ahmad,

who allegedly participated in the proceeding of payment of

ransom amount to the abductors/accused, has been

abandoned by the prosecution for no good reason. Apart from

above all, no data of phone number of the abductee on which

13

demands had been made has been collected to support the
version of the prosecution.

11. The above discussed evidence being pregnant with
doubts and contradictions, by no stretch of imagination would
be sufficient for recording conviction, therefore, the learned
Trial Court by not appreciating the same in its true perspective
reached to an erroneous conclusion by holding the appellants
guilty of the offence. According to golden principle of benefit
of doubt; one substantial doubt would be enough for acquittal
of the accused. The rule of benefit of doubt is essentially a
rule of prudence, which cannot be ignored while dispensing
justice in accordance with law. Conviction must be based on
unimpeachable evidence and certainty of guilt and any doubt
arising in the prosecution case, must be resolved in favour of
the accused. The said rule is based on the maxim “it is
better that ten guilty persons be acquitted rather than one
innocent person be convicted” which occupied a pivotal place
in the Islamic Law and is enforced strictly in view of the saying
of the Holy Prophet (PBUH) that the “mistake of Qazi (Judge)

in releasing a criminal is better than his mistake in punishing

an innocent”. Wisdom in this regard can also be derived from

14

the judgments of the apex court in case titled, "Muhammad
Khan and another Vs the State” (1999 SCMR 1220)
and case titled, “Muhammad Ikram Vs the State”
(2009 SCMR 230).

12. Resultantly, both these appeals are allowed.
Convection and sentences of the appellants recorded and
awarded by the learned Trial Court vide impugned judgment
dated 28.11.2012, are set aside and they are acquitted of the
charges leveled against them. They be set at liberty forthwith,

if not required in any other case.

13. These are reasons of our short order of even date.
Announced.
25.02.2015

JUDGE

JUDGE

*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

15
16

maintained that the learned Trial Court has the
jurisdiction to entertain the suit and in case of
decision of issue of the jurisdiction in favour of the
petitioners, after conclusion of trail, it would be
respondent to suffer and she is ready to face the
consequences of such scenario. He while supporting
the impugned orders, sought dismissal of the instant
petition.

5. Come what may, the issue raised, being a
mixed question of law and fact, can properly be
resolved, after recording pro and contra evidence of
the parties by the learned Trial Court. In view of the
above, the impugned orders of both the courts below
are set aside and the matter is remanded to the
learned Trial Court with the direction to frame a
specific issue (qua) jurisdiction, if already not framed,
to afford an opportunity to the parties for leading
their evidence and then to decide the suit on merits

in accordance with law. The learned Trial Court shall

17

conclude the trial as early as possible, but not later than

4 months, on receipt of the record. Office shall ensure

*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

18
