JUDGEMENT SHEET
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,

D.IL.KHAN BENCH
(Judicial Department)

Cr.MBA.No.308-D/2017

Saleemullah....Versus...Asmatullah and another

JUDGEMENT

Date of hearing: 10.11.2017.

Appellant-petitioner by M/S Saifur Rehman Khan and Inam
Ullah Khan Kundi Advocates.

Respondent By:- M/S Ahmad Ali Khan Marwat Advocate and
Adnan Ali Khan AAG.

SHAKEEL AHMAD, J.- Through this Cr.MBA.No.308-D/
2017, the accused/petitioner Saleemullah seeks post-arrest bail
in case FIR No.218 dated 23.8.2017 registered under Sections
302/324/148/149 P.P.C at Police Station Shaheed Nawab Khan
(Panyala), District D.I.Khan.

2. The prosecution case, as set-forth in the crime
report, is that on 23.8.2017 at 1630 hours, the complainant
namely Asmatullah son of Abdul Qayyum aged about 38/39
years, in injured condition, alongwith dead bodies of his brother
Amanullah, cousin Inamullah and injured Suleman reported the
matter to the local police in the hospital at Panyala and stated
that on the fateful day, he alongwith his nephew Suleman Khan

were present in the thoroughfare street, near shop of one Fazal-

Imran/*
-2-

ur-Rehman at Sayed Abad, in the meanwhile, his brother
Amanullah and cousin namely Imran s/o Abdul Latif came back
from Panyala city on a motorcycle and stopped near them. At
about 04:00 p.m. a white colour motorcar boarded by Arshad,
Amjad son of Rab Nawaz, Rab Nawaz, Amanullah son of
Mehar Khan, Saleem (petitioner/accused), Habib Ullah sons of
Mumtaz Caste Jat residents of Khani Koroona came there. They
deboarded from the vehicle and started beating the complainant
with “Dandas” and bricks, thereafter, they picked up repeaters
and pistol from their vehicle. Amanullah son of Mehar Khan
fired at Amanullah (brother of the complainant) and Saleem son
of Mumtaz fired at his cousin Imran with the intention to kill
them due to which they sustained injuries and died on the spot,
while Arshad, Amjad sons of Rab Nawaz, Rab Nawaz son of
Mehar Khan, Habibullah son of Mumtaz fired at the
complainant and his nephew, as a result of which his nephew
sustained bullet injury while the complainant escaped unhurt,
luckily. After commission of offence, the accused decamped
from the spot, the complainant party could do nothing being
empty handed. The motive, as alleged, is previous scuffle with
the brother of the complainant Amanullah and accused Arshad
and Saleem. The complainant charged the accused for the
commission of the offence.

3. After arrest, the accused/petitioner applied for

post-arrest bail, which was declined vide order dated

Imran/*
-3-

02.10.2017, by the learned Additional Sessions Judge,
Paharpur, D.I.Khan, hence, this petition.

4. It is argued by the learned counsel for the
petitioner that the petitioner/accused is innocent and has falsely
been implicated in the instant case. He relied upon cross version
from the accused side reflected in FIR No.219 registered at the
same police station on the same day at 05:00 p.m. against the
opposite party for attempting at their lives by firing at them. It
was argued that in the presence of the cross case, petitioner was
entitled to be released on bail, because Abdul Latif, Shafiullah
involved from other side had been released on bail; that no
motive against the petitioner has been proved; that version of
the alleged eye-witness was discrepant with the FIR; that the
cross version was plausible; that ocular version is not supported
by medical report and that the injuries sustained do not coincide
with either the site-plan or the testimony of the witnesses; that it
was not known as to which party was aggressor and which was
aggressed and lastly that the petitioner is juvenile.

5. The learned counsel for the respondent/
complainant, on the other hand relied upon the FIR which was
promptly lodged and seriously challenged the genuineness of
the cross-version. It was added that the motive is a fact to be
proved at the trial and even if not proved, it would make least

difference to the well established prosecution version. He lastly

Imran/*
-4-

contended that mere juvenility is no ground to release the
petitioner/accused on bail.

6. After having heard the learned counsel on either
side at length, I am afraid, I would not be able to so intricately
and deeply appreciate the evidence at this stage least it may
damage the case of any of the parties involved, at trial. Even
otherwise, deep appreciation of the evidence, as demanded by
the learned counsel for the petitioner/accused, cannot be
resorted to at bail stage.

7. Suffice it to say that the prosecution case and the
version of the FIR, on the face of it, supported by injured eye-
witness, finds support from the medico-legal report of the
complainant and PM reports of the deceased (Amanullah and
Imranullah) coupled with the motive.

8. In the instant case, five empties of .30 bore and
seven empties of .12 bore were recovered from the spot. The
complainant party, in the counter versions, were not killed, only
the grandson of the complainant namely Habibullah sustained
firearm injuries (as alleged) with no exit wound. They could
have immediately gone to the police station, but the same was
delayed by an hour despite the fact that the police station was
1% kilometer away from the spot. The petitioner has
specifically been named as an offender for committing murder

of Imran. Mere juvenility is no ground to release him on bail.

Imran/*
-5-

9. In view of what has been discussed above, there
being no merit in the petition, it is hereby dismissed. However,
the prosecution is directed to submit complete challan against
the accused within one month and trial Court is directed to
conclude the trial within four (04) months positively.
Announced.

Dt:10.11.2017

(SHAKEEL AHMAD)
JUDGE

Imran/*
