JUDGMENT SHEET

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
PESHAWAR
(Judicial Department)

Cr.Misc.BA_No.1385-P/2015
Date of hearing:
Petitioner (s) :
Respondent (s) :
JUDGMENT

ASSADULLAH KHAN CHAMMKANI, J.-

Petitioner Mst. Shakeela, seeks her release on

bail in case FIR NO.463 dated 07.05.2015,

registered under section 365-A PPC, Police

Station Chamkani, Peshawar, wherein she

alongwith her husband absconding co-accused

Mirza Khan and other absconding co-accused,

are charged for abduction of 19 years old

student, namely, Sartaj.

2. For her release on bail, besides other

grounds, pertaining to merits of the case, the

petitioner has also agitated the ground of having

09 months old suckling baby in her lap. Arrest

card of the petitioner justify her plea, however, it

was contended during the course of arguments

by learned counsel for the petitioner that other

two kids/ sons of the petitioner, have also been

deposited in the Jail with the petitioner on her

application and requested that in the interest of

innocent minor kids of the petitioner, their

mother/the petitioner be released on bail. This

Court in order to reach a right conclusion,

directed learned AAG for the State to requisition

the petitioner from concerned Jail and be

produce before the Court, in compliance

whereof, she was produced in custody by lady

constable Naheed. Besides a female suckling

baby, I noticed two other kids with her. On

query, she disclosed that female baby in her lap,

namely, Raheen is 09 months old, while the

other two kids, namely, Ihsanullah aged 04 years

and Inam aged 03 years, are her sons, who have

*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

been deposited in the Jail on her reqeust. She

stated at the bar that her husband is absconding

in the instant and there was no body to look after

her kids, therefore, they have been deposited

with her in the Jail.

3. Learned counsel for the petitioner

contended that petitioner being a female and

having minor kids including a suckling baby, on

this ground alone is entitled to be released on

bail.

4. Conversely, learned AAG assisted by

learned counsel for the complainant contended

that besides recovery of the abductee from the

house of the petitioner, her confessional

statement prima facie connected her with the

commission of offence, therefore, she cannot

claim bail under proviso to $.497 Cr.P.C. on the

ground of her sex, as §.21-D Anti Terrorism

Act, 1997, has specifically ousted the provisions

of sections 439, 491, 496, 497, 498, 498-A and

*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

561-A of the Code, in cases triable by the Anti

Terrorism Court. They sought dismissal of the

application.
5. Arguments heard and record perused.
6. Admittedly, petitioner has 09 months

old suckling girl in her lap and two minor kids

deposited with her in the jail, later on. The

suckling baby the petitioner as well as her other

children kept in jail, are undoubtedly innocent.

They are kept in jail with their mother/ petitioner

obviously for their welfare as their father is also

accused in the case and is absconding. The

concept of welfare of minor is incompatible with

jail life. Thus, instead of detaining the innocent

infant and other children of the petitioner in the

jail for the crime allegedly committed by their

mother, it would be in the interest of justice as

well as welfare of the minor, if the mother is

released from the Jail. In famous case of

Ghamidiyya, our Holy Prophet Muhammad

*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

(S.A.W) had suspended the sentence on

pregnant woman, not only till delivery of her

child but also posted it till suckling period i.e.

two years, obviously for the welfare of her kid,

which indicate towards paramount importance

and significance of the right of a suckling child

in Islam and the unprecedented care taken of,

and the protection given to a child born or

expected to be born, by the Holy Prophet

Muhammad (S.A.W). It has been held by the

Hon’ble Supreme Court in case titled “Mst.

Nusrat Vs the State ” ( 1996 SCMR 973 ),

that the aforesaid golden principle of

administration of justice enunciated by the Holy

Prophet Muhammad (PBUH), must be strictly

observed and followed in the country and the

august apex Court, respectfully following the

same golden principle, allowed bail to petitioner

in the cited case. The Apex Court in the last

Paragraph of the judgment added that the

*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

principles of justice enunciated by the Muslim

Jurists/Imams/Qazis are more illuminating and

full of wisdom than principles enunciated by the

Western Jurists and scholars. For the true and

safe administration of justice in civil and

criminal cases, the Courts in Pakistan must seek

guidance from decision given and the principles

of dispensation of justice enunciated by our

Holy Prophet Hazrat Muhammad (PBUH), the

four caliphs (Razi Allah Ta’ala un Hum), Imams

and eminent Qazis. These decisions and

principles should be given overriding effect over

the Western principles of justice.

7. Driving wisdom from the judgment of

the Apex Court, I without touching the merits of

the case, lest it may prejudice the case of either

side, allow this petition and release the petitioner

on the sole ground of she being the mother of a

suckling baby, provided she furnishes bail bonds

in the sum of Rs.3,00,000/- with two local,

*M Siraj Afridi PS. D

reliable and resourceful sureties each in the like

amount to the satisfaction of learned Illaqa

Judicial Magistrate/MOD, concerned.

Announced
11.09.2015

JUDGE

*M Siraj Afridi PS. D
*M Siraj Afridi PS. D
