JUDGMENT SHEET

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
PESHAWAR
(Judicial Department)

Cr.A. No.182-P/2015

Date of hearing: 26.03.2015
Date of Announcement: 22.04,2015
Appellant (s): The State through Advocate-General,

Khyber Pakhtunkhwa by Mian Arshad Jan,
AAG.

Respondent (s) : Khalil by Waqas Ahmad Khan Chamkani,
Advocate.

JUDGMENT

ASSADULLAH KHAN  CHAMMKANTI, __J.- Being

discontented with the sentence awarded to respondent-convict

Khalil by the learned ASJ-IV/Judge Special Court, Peshawar,

vide judgment dated 21.10.2009, the State through Advocate-

General Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Peshawar, filed a revision

petition, seeking enhancement of sentence of the convict to

the maximum, as provided under section 9 (c ) Control of

Narcotic Substance Act, 1997. Since there is no provision of

revision in CNS, Act, 1997, therefore, in the interest of justice,

the revision petition was converted into appeal vide order

dated 25.03.2015.

2. Facts in brief forming the background of the

instant appeal are that on 28.08.2008, Zahid Iqbal Inspector

Excise & Taxation Peshawar, on the direction of his high-ups

alongwith Constables, was checking vehicles on Danish Abad

road near Police Post Danish Abad. At 1810 hours, a motorcar

bearing registration No.1396-LWL coming from Karkhano side

was signaled to stop, but the driver accelerated its speed. The

motorcar was chased and eventually intercepted which was

being driven by Khalil (respondent-convict herein) while his

companion sitting in front seat disclosed his name as Zahir

Shah. On search of the vehicle, 3 packets herein, each

weighing one Kilograms were recovered, out of which 5/5

grams were separated from each packet for the purpose of

Chemical analysis by the FSL and sealed in parcels. The

remaining quantity was sealed separately. Both the accused

were formally arrested. The recovered narcotics alongwith

motorcar was taken into possession vide recovery memo

Exh.PW.1/1.

3. Co-accused Zahir Shah, later on, succeeded in

getting bail from this Court vide order dated 21.11.2008 in

Cr.M.BA No.1292 of 2008, but during trial he jumped over his

bail, hence, was proceeded under section 512 Cr.P.C. vide

order dated 28.01.2009, whereas, respondent-convict Khalil

was formally charge sheeted on 18.09.2009, to which he

pleaded not guilty and claimed Trial, hence, prosecution was

invited to lead its evidence. Some three PWs had been

examined, when in the meantime, respondent-convict recorded

his statement wherein he pleaded guilty to the charge and left

himself at the mercy of the Trial Court requesting for taking

lenient view against him. His statement recorded on

21.10.2009, read as under:-

“Stated that though at the time of framing of
formal charge against me, I had refused to
admit my guilt, yet I feel repentance that why
I should not bring the real facts into the notice
of this court. In fact, the local police on
26.08.2008, at 1810 hours, had apprehended
me at Danishabad road near Police Post
Danishabad, falling within the criminal

jurisdiction of Police Station Town and

recovered 03 Kg heroin from the rear
apartment of vehicle No.1396-LWL, which was
driven by me. I plead guilty and seek clemency
of the court for taking lenient view while
awarding me sentence. I also request that my
case may be decided today on the basis of my
plea of guilt”.

The learned trial Court, after recording the plea of guilt of the

respondent-convict, followed by a notice within the meaning

of S.243 Cr.P.C., while taking lenient view, convicted and

sentenced him under section 9 (c) CNS, Act, 1997 to undergo

imprisonment for ten months and to pay a fine of Rs.5000/-

or in default thereof to undergo 02 months S.I. further vide

impugned judgment dated 21.10.2009. Benefit of S.382-B

Cr.P.C. was extended to him.

4. Learned AAG for the State/appellant contends that

punishment awarded to convict-respondent being farcical,

cannot be said to be proportionate to the magnitude of the

crime as 3 Kilogram heroin has been recovered from the

vehicle which was in active control and possession of the

convict; that keeping in view the hazardous effect of heroin in

the society, offenders of such like offences playing with the

health and lives of innocent people, particularly, youths, who

are the future builders of the nation, are required to be

awarded exemplary punishment so as to curtail this menace

to the society, therefore, extraordinary leniency shown by the

learned Trial Court in awarding sentence to the convict,

would encourage the people connected with the detestable

business of narcotics. He, thus, requested for enhancement

of sentence of the convict-respondent to the minimum as

provided by the statute.

5. Conversely, learned counsel for the

convict/respondent contended that it was not the prosecution

to bring home the guilt of the respondent-convict by leading

evidence, rather the convict while minimizing the agonies of

the prosecution, pleaded guilty and left himself at the mercy

of the Court, so in such eventualities, he being friend of the

Court, the matter was between him and the learned Trial

Court; that the learned Trial Court while exercising its

discretion dealt with him with leniency keeping in view the

overall facts and circumstances of the case. He while placing

reliance on this Court judgment in case titled, “The State

through Regional Director ANF Vs Ikramullah and

others” (PLD 2013 Peshawar 35) contended that in the

case (Supra) 10 Kilograms heroin was recovered and on plea

of guilt of the accused, the learned Trial Court convicted and

sentenced the accused to undergo eighteen months rigorous

imprisonment each with a fine of Rs.30,000/- or in default

thereof to suffer 4 months S.I. further vide judgment dated

01.12.2010, against which The State Through Regional

Director Anti-Narcotics Force Khyber Pakhtunkhwa_ filed

Criminal revision petition, but the same was dismissed with

observation that once the accused pleaded guilty, he

becomes friend of the Court and the Court always takes

lenient view against him in awarding sentence. He contended

that the punishment awarded to the convict in the instant

case being in accordance with law, does not warrant

enhancement.

5. We have heard the respective submissions of both

the sides and perused the record with their able assistance.

6. The critical question for determination before us is

whether the learned Trial Court has exercised its discretion

judiciously while awarding lesser sentence to the convict

keeping in view the gravity and magnitude of the offence as

well as its impact on the society at large. To meet the

question, we deem it advantageous to reproduce S.9 Control

of Narcotic Substances Act, 1997, which provides different

punishments for various quantity of the narcotics. It reads as

under:-

“Punishment for contravention of sections 6,

7 and 8:- Whoever contravenes the provisions of

section 6, 7 and 8 shall be punishable with :-

(a) imprisonment which may extend to two
years, or with fine or with both, if the
quantity of the narcotic drug, psychotropic
substance or controlled substance is one
hundred grams or less.

(b) imprisonment which may extend to seven
years and shall also be liable to fine, if the
quantity of the narcotic drug, psychotropic
substance or controlled substance exceeds
one hundred grams but does not exceed one
Kilogram;

(c) death or imprisonment for life or
imprisonment for a term which may extend
to fourteen years and shall also be liable to

fine which may be upto one million rupees,

if the quantity of narcotic drug, psychotropic
substance or controlled substance exceeds
the limits specified in clause (b).

Provided that if the quantity exceeds ten
kilograms the punishment shall not be less

than imprisonment for life”

7. In the instant case, 03 Kilograms heroin has been

recovered from the motorcar of the convict-respondent and

according to sub-section (c ) of Section 9 Control of Narcotics

Substances Act, 1997, if the quantity of the narcotic drug,

psychotropic substance or controlled substance exceeds one

Kilogram then the convict may be awarded sentence of death

or imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term which

may extend to fourteen years and shall also be liable to fine

which may be upto one million rupees. By use of words

“may” the aforesaid sentences have been squarely left at

the discretion of the Court. We do agree that in light of

discretion given in the sub-section (c ) of Section 9 CNS, Act,

the Court in case of proof of the guilt of an accused, may

award him/her sentence of death, imprisonment for life, or

imprisonment from one day to fourteen years, but the main

thing is the judicious exercise of discretion in quantum of

sentence. We have perused judgment of this Court referred

and relied upon by learned counsel for the convict, in case

titled, “The State through Regional Director ANF

Versus Ikramullah and others” (PLD 2013 Peshawar

35). It has been laid down by their lordships in the judgment

supra that “it is a common practice that once a person who is

involved in a criminal case wants to plead guilty to the charge

leveled against him and placed himself at the mercy of the

Court and in that eventuality he becomes a friend of the

Court and the Court always takes lenient view in respect of

his sentence”. With due respect, we do agree with the

opinion of their lordships, but with utmost respect will add

little more that the extent of such leniency in awarding

sentence considering the accused as friend of the Court,

should not be such so as to frustrate the ends of justice and

affect the society, rather such leniency should be based on

judicious scale, keeping in view over all impacts of the crime

because any extraordinary leniency towards the accused in

offences, particularly, affecting the society at large, may

increase the ratio of crimes tremendously.

10

8. In the instant case huge quantity of 03 Kilograms

heroin has been recovered. Albeit, in Control of Narcotic

Substances Act heroin has not been separated from other

narcotics, keeping in view its severe impact on human body

as it causes many short-term and long-term effects on the

human body. It may cause damage to various organs,

including the heart, lungs, liver and kidneys. It can also cause

breathing problems, collapsed veins, infectious diseases and

even death. Same punishment has been provided for heroin

as provided for other narcotic drug under section 9 Control of

Narcotic Substances Act 1997, but during present times

unfortunately crimes of terrorism, abduction for ransom,

murder and attempt to murder and many other are

increasing tremendously and we are also mindful of increase

of detestable business of heroin which has ruined the lives of

the innocent people particularly the youth who are future

builders of the nation. We have observed the addicts of

heroin lying in streets and footpath adding more to the

agonies of their poor parents, who are already grinding in

poverty. Such addicts usually indulge in crimes of theft and

11

even do not hesitate to steal the jewellery and house hold

articles of their own house and houses of their kith and kin.

They instead of adding in the economy of their families,

become unnecessary burden for their parents and family

members, therefore, impact of heroin is more serious as

compared to other narcotics, therefore, the offenders dealing

in the despicable business of heroin, who are enemies of the

entire nation are required to be dealt with an iron hand. We

are not satisfied with the sentence awarded to the convict by

the learned Trial Court. The learned Trial Court has not

exercised its discretion judiciously, keeping in view the

perilous effect of heroin over the society and has extended

undue leniency to the convict. If exercise of such

extraordinary leniency shown by the learned Trial Court is

allowed to prevail, it will increase the smuggling of narcotics

as each and every accused after arrest would try to become

friend of the Court and after getting leniency would again

indulge in the shameful business, which would frustrate the

ends of justice and shatter the future of the nation.

12

9. For what has been discussed above, this appeal is
allowed sentence awarded to the respondent-convict by the
learned Trial Court vide judgment/order dated 21.10.2009
under section 9 (c ) CNS, Act, 1997 is enhanced from ten
months S.I. to 20 months R.I. and fine from Rs.5000/- to
Rs.10,000/- or in default thereof to undergo 04 months S.I.
Benefit of Section 382-B Cr.P.C. is extended to him. Convict-
respondent is present in the Court, as has already served out
the sentence awarded to him by the learned Trial Court,
therefore, he is taken into custody and sent to Judicial
Lockup to serve out his enhanced sentence.

10. Additional Registrar (Judicial) of this Court is
directed to send copy of this judgment to all learned Judges
of the subordinate Judiciary, who are dealing with the cases
of narcotics.

Announced.
22.04.2015

JUDGE

JUDGE

