IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,
PESHAWAR
(Judicial Department)

Crl. Appeal No.568-P/2013
Date of hearing:

Appellant (s) :

Respondent (s) :

JUDGMENT

ASSADULLAH KHAN CHAMMKANTI, J.- At a trial

held by learned Additional Sessions Judge-VIII, Mardan,
appellant Usman Ghani having been found guilty of
committing the ‘qatl-i-amd’ of Mst. Tilawat deceased his
sister-in-law, vide judgment dated 28.10.2013, has been
convicted under section 302 (b) P.P.C. and sentenced to
undergo ‘rigorous imprisonment for life” as well as to pay
a sum of Rs.3,00,000/-, as compensation to LRs of the
deceased in terms of $.544-A Cr.P.C. or in default thereof,
to undergo 06 months S.I. further. Benefit of $.382-B
Cr.P.C. has been extended to him.

2. Through the instant appeal, the appellant has
questioned his conviction and sentence, while Owais
Rehman  petitioner/complainant through connected
Cr.R. No.162-P/2014 titled, “Owais Rehman Vs Usman

Ghani” seeks enhancement of sentence of the convict from

life imprisonment to normal penalty of death as provided
under the law.

3. Since, both the matters are the outcome of
one and the same judgment of the learned Trial Court,
therefore, this common judgment shall govern the same.

4. The prosecution case is that on receipt of
information qua a murder in village Jamrah Salim Khan,
Aman Ullah Khan ASI (PW.2), rushed to the said village,
where Owais Rehman (PW.9), in company of dead body of
his sister Mst. Tilawat deceased, reported him that some
two years back the deceased got married to one Luqman
and from their wedlock, a son Ihtesham was born who is
now 6 months old; that the relation of Luqman became
strained with the deceased as she was being suspected by
him for illicit relation; that on 12.07.2008, he
(complainant) alongwith PW Fahad visited the house of
their deceased sister. An oral altercation took place
between the spouses, during which course, Luqman
husband of the deceased caught hold of her while Usman
(appellant-convict herein)/ brother of Luqman, gave her
axe blow, as a result, she fell and died on the spot. After

commission of the offence, the accused decamped from the

spot.

5. Aman Ullah Khan ASI (PW.2), incorporated
report of complainant into murasila Exh.PA/, on the basis
of which, FIR No.412 dated 12.07.2008 under sections
302/34 PPC, Police Station Sadar, District Mardan was
registered against the appellant and absconding co-accused
Luqman. He also prepared injury sheet and inquest report
of the deceased Exh.PW.2/1 and Exh.Pw.2/2, respectively,
and shifted her dead body to the mortuary under the escort
of Constable Nihar Ali No.1107 for postmortem
examination.

6. Lady Dr. Nasira Anjum (PW.4) on

12.07.2008 at 06.30 p.m. conducted autopsy on the dead

body of the deceased and observed the following injuries

on her person, vide postmortem report Exh.Pw.4/1:-

1. Two sharp injuries parallel to each other, one inch
apart from left parietal bone of skull extending to
temporal bone upto left ears, each 1 x 6 inch.

2. A sharp injury on left occipital bone of skull of
about | x 6 inch. The skull bones found fractured
and brain matter is out.

Opinion:

In her opinion the cause of death of the deceased

was severe injury to brain matter and bleeding.

Probable time between injury and death has been observed
as “ Instantaneous” while between death and postmortem
as “3 to 4 hours”.

7. Fazal Malik SI (PW.13), proceeded to the spot
and prepared site plan Exh.PB on the pointation of the
eyewitnesses. During spot inspection, he secured blood
stained piece of foam Exh.P.1, took into possession an axe
Exh.P.2 from kitchen with which hairs were attached vide
recovery memo Exh.PW.5/2. Vide recovery memo
Exh.Pw.11/1, he took into possession the last worn
bloodstained garments of the deceased, placed on file
postmortem report, sent the bloodstained articles including
the hair attached with iron part of the axe to the FSL for
chemical analysis vide application Exh.PW.13/2, reports
whereof are Exh.PW.13/3 and Exh.PW.13/4, initiated
proceedings under section 204 and 87 Cr.P.C. against the
accused, recorded statements of the PWs under section 161
Cr.P.C., placed on file the photographs of the crime spot
and after completion of investigation, handed over the case
file to SHO, who submitted challan in terms of S.512
Cr.P.C. against the accused.

8. Ayaz Mehmood Khan Inspector (PW.6), shifted
accused-appellant to Mardan, who was arrested by

Islamabad police under section 55/109 Cr.P.C., arrested

him in the instant case vide arrest card Exh.PW.6/34,
obtained his physical remand, interrogated him and
recorded his statement under section 161 Cr.P.C. After
completion of necessary investigation, handed over the
case file to the SHO, who submitted supplementary challan
against the accused/appellant before the learned Trial
Court, where he was summoned and formally charge
sheeted to which he pleaded not guilty and claimed trial.
To prove its case, prosecution examined as many as
thirteen witnesses. After closure of the prosecution
evidence, statement of accused-appellant was recorded
under section 342 Cr.P.C., wherein he denied the
prosecution allegations and professed his innocence. He,
however, neither wished to be examined on oath under
section 340 (2) Cr.P.C. nor opted to produce evidence in
defence. On conclusion of trial, the learned Trial Court,
after hearing both the sides convicted and sentenced the
appellant as mentioned above.

9. Learned counsel for the appellant argued that
abnormal delay of three hours in reporting the incident
despite a little distance of 6/7 Kilometers inter-se the crime
venue and the Police Station, the unnatural conduct of PWs
Owais Rehman and Fahad like silent spectators to

demonstrate the murder of their sister and the mode and

manner of the incident as alleged by the PWs, are the hard
facts which prima facie establish the absence of PWs on
the spot at the time of incident. He contended that actually
the incident is unseen and both the PWs named above,
being brothers of the deceased, their attendance had been
procured, later on, which caused delay of three hours in
lodging report. Had the PWs been present on the spot, both
being young men of 30 to 35 years of age, would not have
allowed the assailant/ assailants to do away with their sister;
that neither the alleged crime axe has been recovered from
possession of the appellant nor on his pointation nor has he
confessed his guilt before the competent court of law nor
the same has been sent to the Expert for comparison with
the finger prints of the appellant; that mere autopsy report
of the deceased, recovery of axe, blood from the spot and
positive Serologist report qua the bloodstained articles,
being corroborative pieces of evidence, in absence of direct
evidence, by itself would not be sufficient enough to
sustain conviction of the appellant; that both the alleged
eyewitnesses have badly failed to establish their presence
on the spot at the time of incident through strong physical
circumstances which create serious doubts in the
prosecution case benefit of which is to be extended to the

appellant, therefore, the learned Trial Court has wrongly

considered and believed their testimony for recording
conviction. He argued that the impugned judgment being
based on surmises and conjectures is liable to be set at
naught. He requested for acceptance of the appeal and
sought dismissal of the revision petition.

10. Conversely, learned AAG assisted by learned
counsel for the complainant argued that appellant is
directly charged by both the eyewitnesses for giving fatal
axe blows on the person of the deceased; that there exists
no reason or motive that the PWs being real brothers of the
deceased would substitute the real culprits of their sister;
that delay in lodging report has been satisfactorily
explained; that the eyewitnesses have furnished
straightforward and truthful account of the incident which
is corroborated by medical evidence, recovery of blood and
crime axe as well as positive Serologist reports in respect
of bloodstained articles and unexplained noticeable
abscondence of the appellant. They argued that prosecution
has proved the guilt of the appellant up to the hilt through
cogent and confidence inspiring evidence and defence
failed to create any dent in the prosecution evidence,
therefore, the learned Trial Court has rightly held the
appellant guilty of the offence. They submitted that there

exists no mitigating circumstance to warrant lesser

sentence, therefore, the appellant whose hands are coloured
with the bloods of an innocent lady deserves maximum
punishment of death provided for the offence. They sought
dismissal of the appeal and requested for enhancement of
sentence.

11. We have given our anxious consideration to
the exhaustive arguments advanced from either side and
perused the record carefully.

12. The incident took place on 12.07.2008 at
13.30 hours in the house of accused, situated in village
Jamrah Salim Khan, at a distance of 6/7 Kilometers from
Police Station Saddar Mardan, but has been reported by
complainant Owais Rehman (PW.9) at 16.30 hours i.e.
after three hours delay, for which period the deceased
remained on the spot and when Aman Ullah Khan ASI,
reached there, the matter was reported to him. The
explanation furnished by complainant that non-availability
of transport caused the delay in reporting the incident, does
not appeal to our mind because in this era of advance
technology usually vehicles are available in each and every
village as well as each and every person is equipped with
the facility of fast communication. If we presume that
transport was not available in village Jamrah Salim Khan,

the two PWs could at least inform the police on cell phone

or could easily arrange any vehicle from the nearby
villages or vehicles Stands. In such like unfortunate
incidents the kith and kin of the deceased/ injured even do
not wait till arrangement of the vehicle rather by putting
the injured/deceased in a Cot with the help of neighbours
and co-villagers, endeavor to shift him/her on their
shoulders to the hospital with the impression and
expectation that he or she might be alive, so as to save his/
her life, what to speak of wait for a long time of three
hours. Thus, delay of three hours in lodging report, prima
facie indicates towards absence of the PWs on the spot at
the time of incident, procurement of their attendance
during this time and lodging of report after deliberation
and consultation.

13. Owais Rehman complainant while appearing
as PW.9 deviated from his version set forth by him in his
initial report wherein he has alleged that on the fateful day
there was oral altercation between the deceased and her
husband Luqman, during which course, Luqman caught
hold of her and the appellant gave her axe blow, which
resulted her death, but in his statement he deposed that
“on the day of occurrence I alongwith PW Fahad were
present in the room of the house of accused when

accused entered and accused facing trial Usman gave

10

axe blows to the deceased who fell on a bed. The
accused decamped after the occurrence and deceased
died on the spot”. He did not utter a single word about
any altercation between the spouses or anything about
catching hold of the deceased by co-accused Luqman.
Fahad while appearing as PW.10 reiterated the same story
furnished by complainant in his report. Both the PWs are
real brothers of the deceased. Admittedly, conviction can
be recorded on the basis of testimony of close relations of
the deceased provided the same is trustworthy, confidence
inspiring and corroborated by other strong circumstances
of the incident. Besides, a witness who claims to be the
eyewitness of the incident must satisfy the mind of the
court about his/her presence on the spot at the relevant time
of incident through some strong circumstances of the case.

14. As per site plan Exh.PB this untoward
incident has been shown in the house of absconding
co-accused Luqman inside his room. The room is eight feet
wide and fourteen feet long. Mst. Tilawat deceased has
been shown at point No.1. Points No.2 and 3 are the places
of PWs Owais Rehman and Fahad, respectively, while
accused Luqman and appellant Usman, have been shown at
points No.4 and 5, respectively. The distance between PWs

and the accused is 02 to 4 feet, while between the deceased

11

and PWs is 3 to 4 feet. Both the appellants are real brothers
of the deceased and young men of 30 to 35 years of age. If
there was verbal altercation between their sister and
absconding co-accused Luqman, they should have been
conscious of the next moments keeping in view the nature
and gravity of altercation or arguments. They should have
been more conscious if the accused was having axe or any
axe was lying there in the room, about which nothing has
been stated by the complainant in his report. In such
scenario, keeping in view the natural human conduct,
particularly, the conduct of brothers, the PWs would have
intervened between the spouses or at least would not have
given a chance at any cost to the accused to do away with
their sister because if the accused were two in number, the
PWs were also not less in number, physique and strength,
but none of the PWs has shown any effort to save the life
of their sister. This unnatural conduct of the PWs/ brothers
like silent spectators is a strong circumstance which speaks
about their absence at the time of incident. None of them
has sustained any injury to justify their presence on the
spot because it cannot be expected from brothers, who are
always considered as shields of sisters, particularly, in the
pathan society, to allow someone even to cause a scratch

on their sisters what to speak of their murder. The above

12

discussed facts and circumstances, further fortify the
absence of the two PWs on the spot and that’s why the
incident has been reported with a delay of three hours, after
procuring their attendance.

15. Yet there is another disturbing aspect that both
the PWs are the residents of village Bhai Khel Mardan,
situated at a distance of 10 Kilometer from the crime spot
as evident from statement of PW Owais Rehman. PW
Owais Rehman is mason by profession and usually goes
for work at about 8.00 a.m. as stated by him in his cross-
examination while PW Fahad is a daily wager and goes for
work at 07.00 a.m. Their stance is that since on the fateful
day it had been raining therefore they being off from work
went to the house of the deceased, who had summoned
them through their relative. None of the PWs has disclosed
the name of the relative through whom they had allegedly
been summoned by their deceased sister nor examined by
the I.O. No shred of evidence, much less tangible, has been
brought on record to prove that the fateful day was a rainy
day and that both the PWs were not at work. Keeping in
view the place of residence of the PWs and their routine
work, they fall within the definition of a chance witnesses.
A chance witness, in legal parlance, is a witness who

claims his presence on the spot at the eventful time, albeit

13

his presence on the spot is a sheer chance, as in the
ordinary course of business, place of residence and normal
course of events, he was not supposed to be present on the
spot, but at a place where he resided, carried on business or
run day to day affairs. Testimony of a chance witness, in
such context, is ordinarily not accepted unless justifiable
reasons are shown to establish his presence at the crime
scene at the relevant time as in normal course, the
presumption under the law that would operate would be
that such witness was absent from the crime spot. In rare
cases, the testimony of a chance witness can be relied
upon, provided some convincing explanation appealing to
a prudent mind of his presence on the crime venue are put
forth, when the occurrence took place, otherwise, his
testimony would fall within the category of suspect
evidence and cannot be accepted without a pinch of salt.
Guidance in this regard can be derived from the judgment
of the august Apex Court in case titled, “Mst. Sughra
Begum and another Vs Qaiser Pervez and others”
(2015 SCMR 11). 16.

16. The learned Trial Court while recording
conviction on the basis of statement of these witnesses has
squarely over sighted the above discussed facts and

circumstances, and thus reached to erroneous conclusion

14

by holding the appellant guilty of the offence. Since, from
the evidence available on record, we are not satisfied about
the presence of the alleged eyewitnesses on the spot at the
time of incident, therefore, it cast serious doubt in the
prosecution case which destroys the entire superstructure
of the prosecution case.

17. No doubt, a recovery of an axe from the
kitchen of the house has been shown as a crime weapon,
but the same has neither been recovered from direct or
indirect possession of the appellant nor on his discovery
nor has it been examined through any Finger Expert
alongwith the finger prints of the appellant because the
role of giving axe blow has been specifically attributed to
the appellant, therefore, in such circumstances, this piece
of evidence, would not advance the case of the
prosecution. Besides, such like recoveries are always
considered as corroborative pieces of evidence, which
cannot be a substitute of direct evidence. Corroborative
pieces of evidence are always taken into consideration
alongwith direct evidence. Similarly, positive Serologist
Report qua bloodstained articles and hair as well as
autopsy report of the deceased, can only prove the
unnatural death of the deceased with sharp object on a

particular place, but by whom, it never tell the name/names

15

of the culprit/culprits. Since, we have disbelieved the
direct evidence; therefore, these corroborative pieces of
evidence by no mean would be sufficient to bring home
the guilt of the appellant. Guidance may be derived from
Riaz Ahmed’s case (2010 SCMR 846). It has been held
by the Hon’ble Supreme Court that in Ijaz Ahmed’s case
(1997 SCMR 1279 and Asadullah’s case (PLD 1971 SC
541), that corroborative evidence is meant to test the
veracity of ocular evidence. Both corroborative and ocular
evidence is to be read together and not in isolation. As per
ratio of judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in case
titled, “Saifullah Vs the State” (1985 SCMR 410), when
there is no eyewitness to be relied upon, then there is
nothing, which can be corroborated by the recovery. In
case titled, “Riaz Masih Vs the State” 1995 SCMR 1730,
it has been observed by the august Apex Court that
recovery of crime weapon by itself is not sufficient for
conviction on murder charge. In case of Siraj Vs Crown
(PLD 1956 Federal Court 123), it was observed that
recovery of handle of blood-stained hatchet at the instance
of the accused, when other evidence was disbelieved, then
it was not enough for conviction. Similarly, mere
abscondence of the accused in absence of confidence

inspiring direct evidence would not be enough to warrant

16

conviction. It is settled law that abscondence alone, cannot
be a substitute of real evidence. It has been observed by
the apex Court in Farman Ali and others’ case (PLD
1980 SC 201), that abscondence by itself would be of no
avail to prosecution in absence of any other evidence
against the absconding accused and mere abscondence of
accused would not be enough to sustain his/her conviction.
Reliance can also be placed on case titled, “Muhammad
Vs Pesham Khan (1986 SCMR 823).

18. In light of the above discussion, we have
reached to an irresistible conclusion that prosecution has
miserably failed to prove the guilt of the appellant through
cogent and confidence inspiring evidence beyond shadow
of reasonable doubt. The learned Trial Court failed to
appreciate the available evidence in its true perspective
and thus reached to erroneous conclusion by holding the
appellant guilty of the offence. The prosecution evidence
is pregnant with doubts, benefit of which is to be
extended to the appellant not as a matter or grace or
concession but as matter of right as per golden principle
of benefit of doubt, according to which, one substantial
doubt would be enough for acquittal of the accused. The
rule of benefit of doubt is essentially a rule of prudence,

which cannot be ignored while dispensing justice in

17

accordance with law. Conviction must be based on
unimpeachable evidence and certainty of guilt and any
doubt arising in the prosecution case, must be resolved in
favour of the accused. The said rule is based on the
maxim “ it is better that ten guilty persons be acquitted
rather than one innocent person be convicted” which
occupied a pivotal place in the Islamic Law and is
enforced strictly in view of the saying of the Holy Prophet
(PBUH) that the “mistake of Qazi (Judge) in releasing a
criminal is better than his mistake in punishing an
innocent”. Wisdom in this regard may be derived from the
judgments of the august Apex court in case titled,
”’Muhammad Khan and another Vs the State” (1999
SCMR 1220) and case titled, “Muhammad Ikram Vs
the State” (2009 SCMR 230).

19. Resultantly, we allow this appeal, set aside
the conviction and sentences of the appellant recorded by
the learned Trial Court vide impugned judgment dated
28.10.2013 and hereby acquit him of the charge levelled
against him. On acquittal of the appellant, connect Cr.R.
No.162-P/2014, has become infructuous, which stands
dismissed.

20. These are reasons of our short order of even

date, which runs as under:-

18

“For reasons to be recorded later on, this appeal
is allowed. The conviction and sentences of the
appellant, namely, Usman Ghan, awarded to
him in case FIR No.412 dated 12.07.2008 under
sections 302/34 PPC Police Station Saddar
District Mardan by learned Additional Sessions
Judge-VII, Mardan vide impugned judgment
dated 28.10.2013 are set aside and he is
acquitted of the charges lvelled against him. He
be released from jail forthwith, if not required
in any other case”.

Announced.
03.12.2015

JUDGE.

JUDGE.

