JUDGMENT SHEET

IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT, PESHAWAR
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT

W.P.No...252 of 2015

JUDGMENT
Date of hearing 30.04.2015
Petitioner Khalid Khan
Respondent The State

REKKKEKKRKEKKRKEKKRKEKEKEK

NISAR HUSSAIN KHAN, J.- Petitioner seeks issuance

of an appropriate writ with direction to the respondents to act in
accordance with law and extend him benefit of Section 382-B

Cr.P.C.

2. Precisely stated facts leading to the filing of
instant petition are that petitioner was employed in Pakistan Air
Force where from he deserted and later on was arrested on
2.9.2014. He was charge sheeted by the District Court-Martial
(hereinafter referred to as DCM) and consequently convicted on

15.10.2014 and accordingly sentenced for one year and 10 months
RI and was also dismissed from service. His conviction and

sentence was confirmed by the confirming Authority on

26.11.2014. Main grievance of the petitioner is that by awarding

sentence, benefit of section 382-B Cr.P.C. has not been extended

which, according to him, is his fundamental right but has been

infringed by passing the impugned order.

3. Learned counsel for petitioner vehemently

contended that petitioner has been discriminated by not

extending benefit of Section 382-B Cr.P.C. which is extended to

other prisoners. In support of his arguments, he placed reliance

on Dr. Muhammad Aslam Khaki Vs The State (PL D 2010 Federal

Shariat Court - 1).

4. Learned Deputy Attorney General, while

controverting the arguments of learned counsel for petitioner,

contended that Rule 99 of Pakistan Air Force Act Rules 1957

provides similar benefit which has already been extended to the

petitioner, hence he is not entitled for relief asked for.

5. We have gone through the record carefully and

have also considered the submissions made by the learned

counsel for the parties.
6. Respondents in their comments have elaborated
the status of the petitioner, according to which, he was Junior
Technician, Pak-484546 General Fitter as Airman of Pakistan Air
Force and was subject to Pakistan Air Force Law under Section
2(b) of Pakistan Air Force Act, 1953. He was enrolled on 4.5.1992
and deserted on 1.10.1997. He was arrested on 2.9.2014 from
Hayatabad Peshawar after desertion period of about 17 years. He
was charged under Section 38(1) Pakistan Air Force Act, 1953 for
deserting the service and 54(b) for loss of Kit items worth
Rs.3434/-. The District Court Martial (hereinafter called DCM)was
convened under the Pakistan Air Force Act, 1953, for his trial.
Petitioner pleaded guilty to the charge. The DCM accepted his
plea of guilt and convicted and sentenced him to suffer one year
and 10 months R.I. alongwith dismissal from service. It is averred
in their comments that DCM considered pre-trial custody of 44
days of the petitioner, and due to the same reason, he was not
awarded full dose of two years punishment. He had challenged
his conviction before court of appeal who further remitted two
months R./. The confirming authority too extended leniency and
remitted 6 months R.I. Since pre-trial custody has already been

considered, so it cannot be extended twice.
7. Pivotal questions in the case is: as to whether
benefit of Section 382-B Cr.P.C. can be extended to the petitioner
who has been convicted by the DCM under Pakistan Air Force
Act, 1953? And whether he has been discriminated by not

extending benefit of Section 382-B Cr.P.C.?

8. Pakistan Air Force, Pakistan Army and Pakistan
Navy are the Armed Forces, assigned with special task of national
security against internal or external threats/aggression. To
maintain discipline and high standard of combating capacity and
efficiency, they are governed by their respective Acts/Statutes.
Pakistan Air Force is governed by the Pakistan Air Force Act,
1953 which has self contained penal and procedural provisions.
To give them full effect, Pakistan Air Force Act Rules, 1957 have
been framed. Chapter-VI of the Act defines offences and Chapter-
VII deals with the punishment. Chapter-X of the Act provides
constitution of the Courts-Martial while Chapter-X! supplies
procedure for trial before the Courts-Martial. Subsequent
Chapters-XIl & XIII relate to confirmation of conviction, appeals
and revision and execution of sentence respectively. It manifests

that Courts-Martial have their own procedure of trial and
provisions of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, are not
applicable thereto. Similar provisions are embodied in Pakistan
Army Act, 1952 and the Pakistan Navy Ordinance, 1961. All the
armed forces have their independent procedure and forum of
investigation, enquiry, trial and appeals. It is their internal
mechanism of procedure of enquiry and trial which with the
passage of time has proved successful for maintenance of order

and discipline.

9. Section 164 of the Pakistan Air Force Act, 1953 to
some extent is analogous to section 382-B Cr.P.C. which provides
that when a person is sentenced under the Act to imprisonment
or detention, his sentence shall, whether it has been revised or
not, be reckoned from the day on which the original proceedings
were signed by the President. It clearly suggests that period of
trial is to be computed toward served out sentence. Similarly,
Rule 99 of Pakistan Air Force Act Rules, 1957 empowers the
Courts-Martial to consider the period of confinement, pending
trial, apart from other factors including general character, age,
services, rank and any recognized act of gallantry or

distinguished conduct of the accused while awarding the
sentence. This rule empowers the Courts-Martial to reduce the

sentence, proportionate to the period spent in confinement during

trial. However, it is not obligatory in view of the tone, tenor and

language employed in the Rule. Section 164 of the Pakistan Air

Force Act, 1953 and Rule 99 of the Pakistan Air Force Act Rules,

1957 are pari-materia to Section 382-B Cr.P.C. with only

distinction that in the former two, Court-Martial has been

empowered to itself consider the period of confinement during

the trial and accordingly remit the sentence, whereas in the latter,

jail authorities are required to compute the sentence while

reckoning the period of detention during trial, towards

imprisonment.

10. Another aspect of the case is that Section 164 of

the Act by insertion of word “shall” has made it mandatory to

reckon the period of detention during trial in computing the

sentence of imprisonment. While Rule 99 is discretionary.

However, the spirit of Section 382-B Cr.P.C has been employed in

Pakistan Air Force Act 1953 as well as Pakistan Air Force Act

Rules, 1957. Whereas learned counsel for respondents, while

referring to the different documents , has stated that the period of
detention has already been considered and remitted by the

Courts-Martial itself.

11. Be that as it may, we while deciding writ petition
are required to exercise Constitutional jurisdiction within the
domain of Article 199 of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of
Pakistan, 1973. Sub Article (3) of Article 199 of the Constitution
envisages that no order shall be made under clause (1) of Article
199 in relation to a person who is member of the Armed Forces of
Pakistan in respect of any matter arising out of his service or in
respect of any action taken in relation to him as member of Armed
Forces of Pakistan. Since in the case of petitioner, an action has
been taken against him as member of Pakistan Air Force, so this
Court cannot interfere with any order passed against him by the
hierarchy of Pakistan Air Force. In case titled Ex. Lt. Col. Anwar
Aziz (PA-7122) Vs Federation of Pakistan through Secretary
Ministry of Defence, Rawalpindi_and 2 others (PLD 2001
Supreme Court - 549), petitioner was convicted and sentenced to
fine of Rs.3 lac and was also dismissed from service by the Field
General Courts-Martial. Appeal was also dismissed. He invoked
the Constitutional jurisdiction of High Court under Article 199 of

Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 which too was
dismissed by the Honourable Lahore High Court Rawalpindi

Bench, vide judgment dated 8.6.1999. The august Supreme Court

was pleased to dismiss the appeal in view of the bar contained in

Article 199 (3) of the Constitution. In case title Muhammad

Mushtaq _Vs_ Federation of Pakistan (1994 S C MR - 2286

dismissal order of writ petition of this court was challenged

before the august Supreme Court on the ground that the plea

raised before the High Court was based on fundamental rights

guaranteed by the constitution, so bar contained in Article 199(3)

of the Constitution was not applicable to the matter of

fundamental rights. The august Supreme Court dismissed the

petition by holding that the relief regarding fundamental rights

enshrined in sub-article (1) has clearly been barred by sub article

(3) of Article 199 of the Constitution.

12. Fundamental rights of a citizen of Pakistan have

been recognized in Chapter-1 of Part-II of the Constitution of

Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973. The safeguard of which has

been guaranteed by vesting power in the High Court under Article

199(1) of the Constitution by invoking which, the High Court may

pass an order as ordained in Sub Article (1). But at the same time
by insertion of Sub Article (3), an embargo has been imposed in

relation to the matters pertaining to the members of the Armed

Forces. In view of such unqualified bar, this court in exercise of

its Constitutional jurisdiction cannot interfere with any such order

by abridging, rather transgressing the barring clause of same

Article which vests the jurisdiction. This petition, as such, is not

maintainable on this score alone.

13. Arguments of learned counsel for petitioner

regarding discrimination is also misconceived. No doubt, equality

of citizens and their equal treatment and protection of law is a

cherished goal of the Constitution but rule of classification is also

an established principle of law as well as Islamic jurisprudence on

the principle of intelligible differentia. The brief survey of different

provisions of Pakistan Air Force Act 1953 and Pakistan Army Act,

1952, denotes that service structure of the armed forces provide

strict rules of procedure for maintenance of discipline. The

personnel of armed forces, in their matters of service and

discipline are not treated at par with the civil servants or an

ordinary citizen. They have been classified as members of a

different institution, so are required to be treated differently. They
10

have their independent rights and liabilities, according to their
nature of services and duties. The personnel of the Armed Forces
themselves opt for services in the said institutions, being well
conversant with their strict rules of discipline. They cannot turn
around in the matter of an action in their service matter and claim
equality of treatment with the civilians. Hence this argument too is

repelled.

14. Learned counsel for petitioner has vehemently
relied upon case titled Muhammad Aslam Khaki Vs The State
(_PLD 2010 FSC-1) for extension of benefit of section 382-B
Cr.P.C. As it has earlier been observed that Section 164 of the
Pakistan Air Force Act 1953 is self contained supplying the
remedy to the convict that the period of detention shall be
reckoned toward period of sentence. Rather section 164 appears
to be more effective than section 382-B Cr.P.C. because in the
latter, jail authorities are to compute the period of his detention
during the trial for computing his total period of imprisonment
whereas in the former, Courts-Martial while awarding sentence

shall consider the period of detention towards the sentence and
11

reduce the same accordingly. The jail authorities are not involved

for extending relief to a convict.

15. For what has been discussed above, the
propositions propounded at initial stage of judgment in para-7 are
answered accordingly and as corollary thereof, this petition being
meritless, stands dismissed.

JUDGE

Announced on
30 Apr.,2015 JUDGE
