






Cr








HIGH   COURT   OF    SINDH   BENCH
  AT  SUKKUR.
Cr.B.A.No.1082 of 2009.
 
 
 
 
1.For orders on MA 3660/09.
2.For orders on MA 3661/09.
3.For Hearing.
                              -
 
 
01.12.2009.       Mr.Abdul Haque G. Odho advocate for the
applicant.
                  Mr.Sardar Ali
Shah APG.
                              -
 
 
GHULAM SARWAR KORAI, J.- On 21.05.2006 at about
1.30 pm this FIR was registered by one Liaquat Ali Joyo of an incident, which
allegedly took place on 20.05.2006 at 1500 hours. According to complainant, Lal
Bux aged about 38 years, who was employee in a Police Department was his
brother, Sikander Ali, Ali Anwar and Mushtaque Hussain alias Ashiq Ali were
sitting at Oil Agency of Mumtaz Mangi at Kamaldero Bus Stop when at about 3 pm
Nadir Ali Bux Ali, Khan Muhammad and Zawar Ali with pistols came there. Nadir Ali
asked Lal Bux (brother of the complainant) that he had killed his father Abdul
Lateef, therefore, today, he will not be spared. Saying so, accused Nadir Ali
made direct fire from his pistol at Lal Bux with intention to kill him, which
hit him on his abdomen, accused Khan Muhammad and Bux Ali also made direct
fires from their pistols at Lal Bux, which too hit him on his abdomen and
accused Zawar Ali fired from his pistol upon Lal Bux, which also hit him on his
testicles. Due to fear, the complainant party remained silent and the accused
made their escape towards west by making aerial firing. The complainant saw his
brother deceased Lal Bux who sustained five fire arm injuries on his abdomen
while one fire arm injury at his testicle, blood was oozing and was dead.
 
      After
the registration of FIR, the present applicant was arrested on 26.08.2007 and
the final report in the case, was filed on 04.09.2007.
 
      Heard
the arguments of Mr.Abdul Haque G. Odho, learned counsel for the applicant and
Mr.Syed Sardar Ali Shah, learned APG appearing for the State. The latter has
opposed the bail application.
 
      The
learned counsel for the applicant, has contended that an unlicensed pistol was
allegedly recovered from the possession of the applicant for which, a separate
FIR vide Crime No.130 of 2007 was registered at Police Station, Gambat for
offence punishable under Section 13(d) of the Arms Ordinance against the
applicant and  was tried by the Court of
learned IInd Civil Judge and Judicial Magistrate, Gambat, as the recovery of
alleged crime property has not been proved, therefore the applicant was
acquitted from the case. He has also contended that there is a conflict between
ocular version and postmortem report as according to FIR, deceased sustained
five fire arm injuries while medical certificate shows three fire arm injuries
sustained to the deceased. He further contended that the applicant is behind
the bar for a considerable period but the case has not been proceeded.
 
            From
the perusal of the material annexed with this bail application, it appears that
the applicant remained fugitive from law for about 15 months and thereafter he
was arrested on 26.08.2007 though his name was mentioned in the FIR. As per the
learned counsel, the applicant was laborer and was in Karachi and was unaware about the registration of
the FIR but in support of such contention, no documentary proof has been filed.
The conflict between ocular version and postmortem report is no ground for
grant of bail as it is a settled principle of law that the material is to be
assessed tentatively for the disposal of the bail application and the deeper
appreciation is not required at bail stage.
 
            The
learned APG has stated that there is criminal record against the present
applicant as he was involved in two cases punishable for offence under Section
324, P.P.C, one case for offence under Section 353, PPC, one case for offence
under Section 380, PPC, one case for offence under Section 382, PPC and one
case for offence under Section 10/11 of Zina (Enforcement of Hudood) Ordinance.
 
            Since
there is a direct role attributed to the present applicant and he has remained
fugitive from law for 15 months and that the grounds taken on behalf of the
applicant are not sufficient to be considered for grant of bail. So far delay
in conclusion of the trial is concerned, the applicant was arrested on
26.08.2007 and charge was framed on 10.10.2008 and the learned trial Court is
taking efforts to conclude the trial but due to some unavoidable circumstances,
the case could not be proceeded, therefore, I am o the view that the applicant
has no case for grant of bail.
 
            Accordingly
this bail application is dismissed.
 
            Bail
application stands disposed of alongwith all listed applications.
 
 
 
                                                JUDGE
 
 
 
Akber.



