



ORDER SHEET





ORDER SHEET
IN THE HIGH COURT OF SINDH, CIRCUIT COURT, HYDERABAD
 
Cr.B.A.No.S-  512  of 2009
 

DATE                                     ORDER
WITH SIGNATURE OF JUDGE

 
            1. For orders on
office objection.
            2. For hearing.
 
14.09.2010
 
Mr. Salahuddin
Panhwar, Advocate for applicant.
Mr. Shahid Ahmed
Shaikh, A.P.G for the State. 
                                                =
Through this application, the
applicant Zulfiqar seeks post arrest bail in Crime No.181/2010 of P.S Town
Mirpurkhas for offence U/s 9 © of C.N.S Act, 1997. 
The Applicant approached the trial
Court but his bail plea was turned down vide order dated 5.7.2010.
Per prosecution on 21.5.2010
applicant was arrested from Sial colony and from his possession police
recovered 1010 grams chars. Out of which 10 gram was sealed for chemical
examination while remaining charas was sealed separately.
It is inter alia contended that
applicant is innocent and has been falsely implicated in this case. Per learned
counsel, the applicant is a driver by profession and he was employee of the
complainant but few months back he left that job due to some unavoidable
circumstances which caused annoyance to the complainant who booked him in this
false case. It is further contended that though the complainant had spy
information but he did not join any independent person to act as mashir. Per learned
counsel, the case has been challaned and applicant is no more required for
further investigation.
Conversely, Mr. Shahid Ahmed Shaikh,
A.P.G for the State opposed the bail plea on the ground that 1010 grams chars
has been recovered from the applicant therefore, he does not deserve the
concession of bail. 
Heard learned counsel for the parties
and perused the record. 
Admittedly, the applicant was
arrested from thickly populated area of the town but no person from the public
had been cited as witness. Upon a perusal of record, it is not clear whether
the chars was weighed alongwith shopper or the same was weighed separately.
Even the charas allegedly recovered from applicant marginally exceeded the
limit one kg and it appears that this is a border line case and it is yet to be
determined whether the offence would fall U/s 9 (b) or 9 (c) of C.N.S Act,
1997. Even it is not alleged that applicant is a previous convict or facing
proceedings for similar offences. 
For the foregoing reasons, vide short
order daed 7.9.2010, the application was allowed and the applicant was admitted
to bail subject to furnishing solvent surety in the sum of Rs.50,000/- (Fifty
thousand) and P.R Bond in the like amount to the satisfaction of the trial
Court. 
These are the reasons in support of
short order dated 7.9.2010. 
 
 
                                                                                                JUDGE
 
                                                
                                                
 
                                                
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tufail


 



