
















ORDER SHEET
IN THE HIGH COURT OF SINDH, BENCH AT SUKKUR

Crl. Bail Application No.S-693
of 2022
(Piyar Ali @ Piyaral
Vs. The State)

                   
1. For Orders on office objection. 
2. For
hearing of Bail Application
13-03-2023.
            Mr. Saeed Ahmed Chachar, advocate for
the applicant.
            Mr. Alam Sher Bozdar,
advocate for the complainant. 
Mr.
Shafi Muhammad Mahar,
Deputy P.G for the State.
>>>>>>>…<<<<<<<<
Irshad Ali Shah, J;- It is
alleged that the applicant with rest of the culprits after having formed an unlawful
assembly in prosecution of their common object caused fire shot injuries to PW Mumtaz Ali with intention to commit his murder, for that the
present case was registered. 
2.         The applicant on having been refused
Pre-Arrest bail by learned IIIrd Additional Sessions
Judge, Mirpur Mathelo, has
sought for the same from this Court by way of instant bail application u/s
498-A Cr.P.C.
3.         It is contended by
learned counsel for the applicant that the applicant being innocent has been
involved in this case falsely by the complainant party in order to satisfy its
dispute with him over landed property; the FIR has been lodged with delay of
about 01 day; there is counter version of the incident and there is no repeatation of fire shot, therefore, the applicant is
entitled to be admitted to pre-arrest bail on point of further inquiry and malafide.  
4.         Learned Deputy P.G for
the State and learned counsel for the complainant has opposed to grant of
pre-arrest bail to the applicant by contending that the applicant has caused
fire shot injury to PW Mumtaz Ali on his left leg
with intention to commit his murder. 
5.         Heard arguments and
perused the record.
6.         The FIR of the incident
has been lodged with delay of about 01 day; such delay could not be overlooked;
there is counter version of the incident; the injury sustained by PW Mumtaz Ali is on lower part of his left leg, which is not
vital part of his body, it is falling u/s 337F(iii)
PPC; there is no repeatation of injury; the parties
are already disputed over landed property. The case has finally been challaned
and there is no allegation of misusing of concession of interim pre-arrest bail
on the part of the applicant. In these circumstances, a case for grant of
pre-arrest bail in favour of the applicant on point
of further inquiry and malafide obviously is made
out.
7.         In view of above, the
interim pre-arrest bail already granted to the applicant is confirmed on the
same terms and conditions.
8.         The instant bail
application is disposed of accordingly. 
 
 
Judge
Nasim/P.A.
 
 
 



