JUDGMENT SHEET
IN THE PESHAWAR HIGH COURT,

MINGORA BENCH (DAR-UL-QAZA), SWAT
(Judicial Department)

Cr.M B.A No. 967-M/2022

Naseem Ullah v. The State & another

Present: Muhammad Hamayoun, Advocate for the
petitioner.

Mr. Saeed Ahmad, Asst:A.G for the State.
Mr. Nazir Khan, Advocate for the complainant.
Date of hearing: 20.12.2022

JUDGMENT.

Dr. Khurshid Iqbal, J.-

1. Having been charged for attempted murder and
hurt by rash or negligent driving in furtherance of common
intention and possession of unlicensed arms, Naseemullah
has sought his release on bail. The report has been lodged
against the petitioner and another, on the strength of FIR #
86, registered on 06/11/2022, u/ss. 324/337-G/34, PPC;
15-A.A., in the Police Station of Sahib Abad of District
Dir Upper. The petitioner’s bail plea has not found favour

with the trial Court.

2. The complainant, Islam Zamin Khan, reported to
the local police in the Emergency Ward of Tehsil
Headquarter Hospital of Wari that on the eventful day, his
brother, injured Shakirullah, was taking breakfast for

labourers, who were working in his under construction

Abdul Sabooh (S.B.) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Dr. Khurshid Iqbal
\S

house. At 10:20, hours, when he reached to the place of the
occurrence, a motorcar (Vitz) coming from Sahib Abad
Bazaar, collided with him, due to which he fell on the
ground. Two persons, namely, Naseem Ullah (the
petitioner/accused) and Masbeh Ullah sons of Muhib
Ullah, residents of Kasono, Sahib Abad of Tehsil Wari,
District Dir Upper, de-boarded from the aforesaid
motorcar. Naseem Ullah, the petitioner/accused stabbed
Shakirullah with a knife with the intention to kill him.
Resultantly, he received injuries on his head. Co-accused
Masbeh Ullah gave stick blows to the victim, due to which
he felt pain on his body. Similarly, the petitioner/accused
and his co-accused also torn clothes of the victim. The
occurrence was stated to have been witnessed by the
complainant, Altaf Hussain, his brother and Noor Rahman.
Motive behind the occurrence was stated to be previous

enmity.

3. I have heard arguments of learned counsel for
the parties and the learned Assistant Advocate General, for
the State and perused the record. Learned counsel for the
petitioner/accused relied on the cases of Rafeed Niaz,
Akhtar Ullah alias Akhtar Ali and Ali Muhammad." In first

case, the medical report was materially deficient in its

 Rafeed Niaz v. The State and another (2021 SCMR 1467); Akhtar Ullah alias Akhtar Ali v.
The State and another (2021 SCMR 1287); and Ali Muhammad v. The State (PLD 2009 Lahore
312)

Abdul Sabooh (S.B.) Hon'ble Mr. Justice Dr. Khurshid [qbal
contents and did not qualify to be medical evidence. In the
next case, the medical report of the victim was silent on the
dimension of the injury and the weapon of offence was not
recovered from the accused. The third case focuses on the
application of section 337-N, PPC, in the context of
different kinds of hurts. Thus, in the circumstances of the
case in hand, the above-referred cases could be of no help

to the petitioner/accused.

4. Conversely, the cases the learned counsel for the

complainant produced are Aurangzeb; Haji Shah Behram;

Noor Aslam: Ghazan_ Khan; Haji Muhammad Nazir and

Khalid?

5. There is an established judicial opinion that the
facts and circumstances of criminal cases immensely differ
from each other, requiring assessment of culpability of an
accused person within the purview its own atypical
circumstances. This opinion has been given by the august
Apex Court in Haji Muhammad Nazir reported in 2008.
The latest case in which this opinion has been reiterated is

Haji Shah Behram. The august Apex Court has observed:

“Criminal cases, invariably resting upon vastly
distinguishable facts, do not admit space for

? Aurangzeb v. The State and others (2022 SCMR 1229), Haji Shah Behram y. The State and
others (2021 SCMR 1983), Noor Aslam v. The State through P.G. and another (2021 SCMR
1225), Ghazan Khan v. Mst. Ameer Shuma and another (2021 SCMR 1157), Haji Muhammad
Nazir and others v. The State (2008 SCMR 807) and Khalid v. The State and another (2018
MLD 398) [Peshawar]

Abdul Sabooh (S.B.) Hon’ble Mr. Justice Dr. Khurshid Iqbal
hard and fast rules, empirically applicable with
any degree of unanimity in every situation; in
each case culpability of an accused is to be
assessed, having regard to its own peculiar facts
and circumstances, therefore, determination of
"sufficient grounds" in contradistinction to
"further inquiry” has to be essentially assessed,
with a fair degree of objectivity on the basis of
evidence collected during the investigation;
wording employed as "there are no reasonable
grounds for believing that the accused has
committed a non-bailable offence" is an
expression of higher of import and, thus, cannot
be readily construed in the face of material,
prima facie, constituting the offence
complained. "Every hypothetical question
which can be imagined would not make it a case
of further inquiry simply for the reason that it
can be answered by the trial subsequently after
evaluation of evidence’ [PLD 1994 Supreme
Court 65 (Shah Zaman and others v. The State
and another)]. Similarly, "mere possibility of
further inquiry which exists almost in every
criminal case, is no ground for treating the
matter as one under subsection (2) of section
497, Cr.P.C. [PLD 1988 Supreme Court 621
(Asmat Ullah Khan Vs. Bazi Khan and
another)]. It clearly manifests that expression
“further inquiry" is a concept far from being
confounded in subjectivity or to be founded
upon denials or parallel stories by the defence;
it requires a clear finding deducible from the
record so as to be structured upon a
visible/verifiable void, necessitating a future
probe on the basis of material hitherto
unavailable.”

6, The application of “further inquiry” was also
discussed in a 1985 case of Arbab Ali.’ The following

observation of the august Apex is worth perusal:

“Tt needs to be clarified that bail can be allowed
(in a case otherwise allegedly falling under the
prohibition contained in subsection (1) of
section 467) under subsection (2) of section 487,
Cr.P.C. when there are sufficient grounds, for
further inquiry into the guilt of the accused but

3 Arbab Ali v. Khamiso and others (1985 SCMR 195)

Abdul Sabooh (S.B.) Hon’ble Mr. Justice Dr. Khurshid Iqbal
only on the condition when the Police Officer or
the Court at any stage of investigation, inquiry
or trial, as the case may be, comes to a definite
conclusion that there are no reasonable grounds
for believing that the accused has committed a
non-Bailable offence. Without this finding bail
cannot be allowed under subsection (2) on mere
ground that there are sufficient grounds of
further inquiry.”

It seems pertinent to mention here that in Aurganzeb and
Haji Shah Behram, the august Apex Court cancelled bails
granted in cases registered under sections 324/34/337,

PPC; and in Noor Aslam, upheld a bail cancellation order.

7. Coming to the case in hand, on a tentative
assessment of the material available on the record, it
appears that the petitioner/accused has been directly
charged in the FIR with a specific role of having caused
knife blows to the victim on his head, which is doubtlessly
a vital part of the body. He has also been charged for
tearing clothes of the victim. He has been stated as sitting
in a motorcar that first collided with the victim, as a result
of which the victim fell on the ground. As the FIR story
reflects, it was after the collision that the petitioner
attacked on the victim. On search of the motorcar,
incriminating articles, such as, a knife and two chargers
containing 20 rounds of 7.62 bore rifle have been
recovered. The site plan shows the petitioner’s presence on
the spot. The observation in the medical report shows that

knife blows have been given to the victim on his head. It

Abdul Sabooh (S.B.) Hon’ bie Mr. Justice Dr. Khurshid Iqbal
follows that the FIR, the site plan and the medical report
tentatively link the petitioner/accused with the commission
of the offences in hand. Yet another significant aspect is
that a Motor Vehicle Examiner has found no mechanical
fault in the motorcar in which the petitioner/accused was
sitting and that was initially stated to have collided with

the victim.

8. Learned counsel for the complainant argued that
while the parties appeared before the trial Court for a
hearing in the instant case, some relatives of the
petitioner/accused chased the complainant party. He
produced a copy of an FIR No. 345 dated 29.11.2022,
registered by Adil Inayat, PASI of Police Station Wari, u/s.
15-A.A. He also produced a copy of another criminal case,
bearing FIR No. 188 dated 30.08.2002, registered u/ss.
377/337-G/34, PPC, and 12 Z.O in Police Station Wari,

uncovering previous enmity between the parties.

9. As discussed above, a prima facie connection
exists against the petitioner/accused for the reasons that he
has been directly charged for having caused knife blow to
the victim on head, which appears to be an attempt on his
life; the site plan and the medical report support the charge
against him. Moreover, there is no question of his

identification. The occurrence has taken place on broad

Abdul Sabooh {S.B.) Hon’ble Mr. Justice Dr. Khurshid Iqbal
daylight. The punishment provided for the offence for
attempt to commit murder is hit by the prohibitory clause

of section 497, Cr. P.C.

10, Resultantly, the instant bail petition is dismissed.
The observations recorded hereinabove shall have no

bearing on the merits of the case.

Announced

Dt: 20.12.2022
se) —

Ct- / Abdul Sabooh (S.B.) Hon’ble Mr. Justice Dr. Khurshid Iqbal

° 18/o/ |

